Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 1.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
DIVINE COUNCIL A term used by Hebrew Bible scholars for the heavenly host, the assembly of divine 
beings who administer the affairs of the cosmos under Yahweh, the God of Israel. All ancient 
Mediterranean cultures had some conception of a divine council, including Israel. However, Israelite 
religion’s divine council was distinct. The structure of the Israelite divine council has implications for 
understanding God and the unseen world in biblical theology. 
Textual Evidence and its Ancient Canaanite Context 
The Council of the Gods / God. Most Bible translations show that Israel believed in an assembly of 
heavenly host under the authority of Yahweh. Modern translations do not show clearly that this 
assembly is similar to pantheons of ancient Near Eastern cultures. A close reading of the Hebrew text 
and comparisons with other ancient non-biblical texts from Canaan demonstrate this similarity (Mullen, 
Handy, “Host”; Cross “Epic”; Smith “Early”; Smith, “Origin”; Korpel, Rift in the Clouds). 
The clearest example is the cuneiform literature from Ras Shamra (Ugarit), discovered in the late 
1920s. As a Semitic language, Ugaritic is closely related to biblical Hebrew—it shares vocabulary, as well 
as morphological and syntactical features. Many of the Ugaritic tablets describe a council of gods in 
words and phrases that are conceptually and linguistically parallel to the Hebrew Bible. The Ugaritic 
divine council was led by El, the same word used in the Hebrew Bible for deity and as the proper name 
for the God of Israel (e.g., Isa 40:18; 43:12). References to the “council of El” include: pḫr ʾilm (assembly 
“of El” or “of the gods”; KTU 1.47:29, 1.118:28, 1.148:9); pḫr bn ʾilm (assembly “of the sons of El” or “of 
the gods”; KTU 1.4.III:14); mpḫrt bn ʾilm (“assembly of the sons of El”; KTU 1.65:3; compare 1.40:25, 42); 
and ʿdt ʾilm (assembly “of El” or “of the gods”; KTU 1.15.II:7, 11). 
The Hebrew Bible has phrases that explicitly parallel these Ugaritic expressions (Parker, “Sons of 
[the] God[s]”; Cooke, “The Sons of [the] God[s]”). Psalm 82:1 is perhaps the best example. It calls the 
council (עֲ דַ ת־
אֵ ל, adath-el) and describes gods under the authority of Israel’s God: “God (אֱ ֹלהִ ים, 
elohim) stands in the council of El/the divine council (עֲ דַ ת־אֵ ל, adath-el); among the gods (אֱ ֹלהִ ים, 
elohim) he passes judgment.” The second occurrence of אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) must be semantically plural 
due to the preposition “in the midst of.” This does not refer to the Trinity—Psalm 82 goes on to describe 
how Israel’s God accuses the other 
ֹאֱ ֹל
הִ ים (elohim) of corruption and sentences them to die “like 
humankind.” This plurality does not refer to human beings. Psalm 89:5–7 places the God of Israel “in the 
assembly of the holy ones” (בִ קְ הַ לֹקְ דֹשִ ים, biqhal qedoshim) and then asks “For who in the clouds 
(בַ שַ חַ ק, bashshachaq) can be compared to Yahweh? Who is like Yahweh among the sons of God (ֹבְ נֵי
אֵ לִ ים, beney elim), a god greatly feared in the council of the holy ones (בְ סֹוד־קְ דֹשִ ים, besod-

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 2.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
qedoshim)?” Psalm 29:1 commands the same sons of God (בְ נֵיֹאֵ לִ ים, beney elim) to praise Yahweh 
and give him due obeisance. Divine “sons of God” (בְ נֵיֹאֵ לִ ים, beney elim, בְ נֵיֹהָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, beney 
ha'elohim; or בְ נֵיֹאֱ ֹלהִ ים, beney elohim) appear in other biblical texts (Gen 6:2, 4; Job 1:6; 2:1; 38:7; 
and Deut 32:8–9, 43 (Septuagint; Qumran); Heiser, “Deuteronomy 32:8”). 
The Divine Abode and Meeting Place of the Divine Council. At Ugarit, the council of El and its gods met 
on a mountain or lush garden (Clifford, The Cosmic Mountain). These descriptions are actually the same 
place. The abode of El was at the “source of the two rivers” (mbk nhrm) in the “midst of the fountains of 
the double-deep” (qrb ʾapq thmtm). El and his “assembled congregation” (pḫr mʿd) met to issue divine 
decrees from the “tents of El” (ḏd ʾil) and his “tent shrine” (qrš; KTU 1.1.III:23; 1.2.III:5; 1.3.V:20–21; 
1.4.IV:22–23; 1.6.I:34–35; 1.17.VI:48). This description of gods living and meeting in “tents” (ʾahlm) or 
“tabernacles” (mšknt) is common at Ugarit (KTU 1.15.3.18–19). The Ugaritic god Baal, the deity who 
oversaw the council for El, held meetings on Mount Ṣpn. Baal’s palace had “paved bricks” (lbnt) that 
made Baal’s house “a house of the clearness of lapis lazuli” (bht ṭhrm ʾiqnʾum). 
The Hebrew Bible uses similar place descriptions. The most obvious are the tabernacle (מִ שְ כַ ן, 
mishkan) and Tent of Meeting (אֹהֶ לֹמֹועֵ ד, ohel mo'ed), both common in the Old Testament narrative. 
Yahweh also dwelled on mountains (Sinai or Zion; e.g., Exod 34:26; 1 Kgs 8:10). In Psalm 48:3 the 
Jerusalem temple is said to be located in the “heights of the north” (יַרְ כְ תֵ יֹצָ פֹון, yarkethey tsaphon). 
Mount Zion is the “mount of assembly” (הַ ר־מֹועֵ ד, har-mo'ed), again located in yarketê ṣpn (ֹיַרְ כְ תֵ י
צָ פֹון, yarkethey tsaphon; Isa 14:13). Additionally, Zion is described as a watery habitation (Isa 33:20–22; 
Ezek 47:1–12; Zech 14:8; Joel 3:18). Ezekiel 28:13–16 equates the “holy mountain of God” (ֹהַ רֹקֹדֶ ש
אֱ ֹלהִ ים, har qodesh elohim) with Eden, the “garden of God” (גַ ן־אֱ ֹלהִ ים, gan-elohim). Eden appears in 
Ezek 28:2 as the “seat of the gods” (מֹושַ בֹאֱ ֹלהִ ים, moshav elohim). The description of Eden in Gen 
2:6–15 refers to the “ground flow” that “watered the entire face of the earth.” At Sinai, Moses and 
others saw the seated God of Israel, under whose feet was a “pavement of sapphire stone” (ֹלִ בְ נַ ת
הַ סַ פִ יר, livnath hassappir; Exod 24:9–10). 
The Structure of the Divine Council. The divine council at Ugarit may have had four tiers, but the 
evidence is not conclusive (Smith, Origins, 41–53). A three-tiered understanding may be better. 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 3.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
The top tier consisted of El and his wife Athirat (Asherah). The second tier was the domain of their 
royal family (“sons of El”; “princes”). One member of this second tier, Baal, served as the co-regent of El. 
Despite being under El’s authority, he was called “most high” (Wyatt, “Titles”). A third tier was for 
“craftsman deities,” while the fourth and lowest tier was reserved for the messengers (mlʾkm), 
essentially servants or staff (Cho, Lesser Deities). 
There is solid evidence in the Hebrew Bible for a three-tiered council. In the divine council of 
Israelite religion, Yahweh was the supreme authority over a divine bureaucracy that included a second 
tier of lesser אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim), also called the “sons of God” (בְ נֵיֹאֵ לִ ים, beney elim, בְ נֵיֹהָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, 
beney ha'elohim, or בְ נֵיֹאֱ ֹלהִ ים, beney elohim) or “sons of the Most High” (בְ נֵיֹעֶ לְ יֹון, beney elyon). It 
may be significant that these “sons of God” are never clearly referred to as angels (מַ לְ אָ כִ ים, 
mal'akhim) in the Hebrew Bible, as that word denoted the lowest tier of the Canaanite council, and thus 
a third tier in the Israelite version. Still, mlʾkm at Ugarit were considered gods, despite their subordinate 
role. It is possible that מַ לְ אָ כִ ים (mal'akhim) are referred to as אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) in the Hebrew Bible. 
In Israel’s divine council, the highest tier is different from the Canaanites’ conception. Instead of El 
and Baal, his vice-regent, Yahweh occupied both slots in a sort of binitarian godhead (Heiser, “Divine 
Council”). Yahweh is described in the Hebrew Bible by means of titles and abilities that both El and Baal 
have in Canaanite literature—these two were conceptually fused in Yahweh. This literary and 
theological device shows Yahweh superior to the two main divine authority figures in wider Canaanite 
religion. 
The way Yahweh filled the positions both of supreme ruler and vice-regent is also shown by His 
occasional visible appearances (Hamori “When”; Hamori, “Embodiment”; Sommer, The Bodies of God). 
For example, the Angel of Yahweh is sometimes indistinguishable from Yahweh (e.g., Exod 3:1–14). The 
Angel is said to have Yahweh’s “Name” in him (Exod 23:20–23). Scholars have long noted the presence 
of a “name theology” in the Hebrew Bible (Mettinger “Dethronement”; Huffmon, “Name”) where the 
name is another way of referring to Yahweh Himself. Thus, Yahweh was in the Angel, and yet Yahweh 
and the Angel could be simultaneously present (Judg 6). Both the God of Israel and the Angel are said to 
have brought Israel out of Egypt (Judg 2:1–3; 1 Sam 8:8; Micah 6:4)—an observation that makes Deut 
4:37 an important consideration for binitarianism, since that verse tells us the “Presence” of Yahweh 
was responsible for the deliverance from Egypt. The divine presence must be understood as Yahweh 
Himself, His “essence” as it were. The angel—as co-regent—fills Baal’s role as El’s warrior. It is the angel 
who led Israel to the promised land as the captain of the Lord’s host, “sword drawn in his hand” (ֹחַ רְ בֹו
שְ לּופָ הֹבְ יָדֹו, charbo sheluphah beyado)—a precise description found in only two other places in the 
Hebrew Bible, both of which describe the angel of Yahweh (Num 22:23; 1 Chr 21:16). The result is that—
while orthodox Yahwism could not accommodate cosmic rule being shared by two separate and distinct 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 4.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
deities (El and Baal)—it could tolerate Yahweh in two personages. That the angel had the 
presence/name/essence of Yahweh in him, but was a distinct personage, meant he “was but wasn’t” 
Yahweh. 
The Israelite binitarian godhead is also indicated by the “rider on the clouds” motif in the Hebrew 
Bible. This epithet was a well-known title for Baal (Herrmann, “Rider upon the Clouds”). For orthodox 
Yahwists, Baal’s attributes were taken over by Yahweh, their rightful bearer. The Hebrew Bible 
consistently refers to Yahweh as the one who rides the clouds (Psa 68:4, Psa 68:5 in Hebrew; 68:33, Psa 
68:34 in Hebrew; 104:3; Deut 33:26; Isa 19:1) with one exception: the “son of man” in Dan 7:13. This 
character in Dan 7 is distinct from the enthroned deity, the ancient of days, who was expected to bear 
this Yahweh-title of the Hebrew Bible. This passage, along with the “man of war” (the angel) formed the 
basis for Judaism’s doctrine of two powers in heaven, a point of orthodoxy until the second century AD 
(Segal, Two Powers in Heaven). 
The Hebrew Bible also informs us that at least some Israelites considered Yahweh to have had a 
divine wife, Asherah (2 Kgs 21:1–7; 2 Chr 15:16). The archaeological picture echoes this belief, most 
notably in the finds at Kuntillet ʿAjrud and Khirbet el-Qom, where inscriptions include prayers to Yahweh 
and “his Asherah” (Dever). It should be noted, though, that “his Asherah” may refer to a shrine and not 
the goddess (Hess, “Yahweh and his Asherah?”). It cannot be demonstrated that the theology of the 
prophets and biblical writers contained this idea, or that it was permissible. Other figures and motifs 
include “wisdom and the word” (Ringgren, Word and Wisdom). 
Decision Making in the Divine Council 
In the Ugaritic council, members would sometimes challenge each other during their deliberations 
(Handy, “Authorization”). However, there are also passages in the Ugaritic material that nearly equate El 
with the entire council (Mullen, “Divine Council,” 129, 142)—the decrees of the council are the decrees 
of El. The Israelite conception of the divine council also included deliberation and opposition, yet the will 
of God was ultimately done. 
Council Member Participation. First Kings 22:19–23 is an important text regarding the participation of 
council members: 
“And Micah said, ‘ (‘)Therefore hear the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting on his throne, and 
all the host of heaven standing beside him on his right hand and on his left; and the LORD said, “Who 
will entice Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead?” And one said one thing, and another said 
another. Then a spirit came forward and stood before the LORD, saying, “I will entice him.” And the 
LORD said to him, “By what means?” And he said, “I will go out, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of 
all his prophets.” And he said, “You are to entice him, and you shall succeed; go out and do so.” Now 
therefore behold, the LORD has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these, your prophets; the LORD has 
declared disaster for you.’ ” 
Yahweh decided that Ahab should die, but allows discussion about how he should die. After some 
discussion, one spirit steps forward with a proposal. Yahweh accepts it and says that it will succeed. 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 5.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
Nothing in the passage suggests that Yahweh learns anything here, or that He didn’t know what the 
suggestion would be. Nor does it support the idea that Yahweh predestinated the suggestion. The 
narrative only demonstrates that Yahweh allowed council members to choose how to carry out the 
decree. 
The aftermath of the Babel incident shows that Yahweh expected that council beings use their own 
free decision making capacity. In Deuteronomy 4:19–20 and 32:8–9, Yahweh divided and assigned the 
nations to lesser gods (Heiser, “Sons of God”). Yahweh delegated authority—He rejected the nations as 
His own people and took Israel as His portion. While Yahweh is ultimately sovereign, He does not 
unilaterally govern the other nations. He leaves that to subordinates, who should rule according to His 
will. When they don’t, they are judged. This is precisely the point of Psa 82, where Yahweh judges the 
gods of his council who are responsible for corrupt rule over the nations of the earth. 
Yahweh’s Will and Council Activity. Two examples of council deliberation in the book of Daniel make 
the council almost a part of Yahweh. 
Daniel 4 contains Nebuchadnezzar’s second dream. The announcement of Nebuchadnezzar’s 
punishment is described in Dan 4:17: “The sentence is by the decree of the Watchers, the decision by 
the word of the holy ones, to the end that the living may know that the Most High rules the kingdom of 
men and gives it to whom he will and sets over it the lowliest of men.” Seven verses later (Dan 4:24) the 
sentence is described thus: “This is the interpretation, O king: It is a decree of the Most High, which has 
come upon my lord the king.” This line is followed by the ambiguous plural of 4:26: שַ לִ טִִ֖ ןֹשְ מַָ יּֽא 
(shallitin shemay'). This Aramaic phrase can be translated either “heaven rules” (corporate 
personification), or “the heavenly ones rule” (council authority). The second seems likely—the decree is 
from the Watchers—but it is the (singular) Most High who rules. 
Daniel 7 opens with the vision of the four beasts, symbols which parallel the four kingdoms in Dan 2. 
Daniel 7:9–12 describes a divine council meeting. “Thrones” (plural) are set up. The Ancient of Days is 
seated—the Son of Man does not sit. In Daniel 7:10 the “court” or council is then seated. The books of 
judgment are opened, and the fourth beast is killed. The jointly ruling Ancient of Days and the Council 
(and the Son of Man by implication) are identified with one another: 
1. The judgment occurs after the council was in session. “The court shall sit in judgment and his 
dominion shall be taken away” (Dan 7:26). 
2. In Daniel 2 the fourth kingdom is destroyed by the kingdom of God. 
3. The kingdom of God in Daniel 7 is given by God to the Son of Man, who shares it with the “holy 
ones” of the Most High (Dan 7:25). These are probably not humans—humans are brought into joint 
kingship later: it “shall be given to the people of the holy ones of the Most High” (Dan 7:27). 
“Heavenly ones” is a term that refers to the divine council elsewhere (e.g., Psa 89:5–6; Job 15:15). 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 6.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
The Saṭan. The saṭan (הַ שָ טָ ן, hassatan) in Job 1–2 is not a proper name—it lacks the Hebrew definite 
article prefixed to the noun (Peggy Day, An Adversary in Heaven). This “Adversary” (the meaning of the 
Hebrew term) is therefore not the Devil, as known in the New Testament. Lowell Handy points out that 
the Adversary’s behavior in Job 1–2 is consistent with that of various deities in council scenes in Ugaritic 
material, where a lesser deity reports to a higher deity (Handy, “Authorization”). The Adversary is the 
deity responsible for checking on the misbehavior of humans. He is actually not talking back to God, but 
pointing out that humans behave well if they are not under duress. Yahweh decides to test the 
Adversary’s estimation, knowing full well that Job will endure. 
Monotheism in the Hebrew Bible and the Divine Council 
Biblical Polytheism? The presence of a divine council in the Hebrew Bible does not means that Israel’s 
religion was at one time polytheistic (there are many gods) or henotheistic (there are many gods, but 
one is preferred) and later evolved to monotheism. Both views presume that the gods were equal. 
Archaeological remains and passages in the Hebrew Bible show polytheism in Israel, but this was not 
orthodox Israelite belief. The biblical writers refer to Yahweh as “the God” (הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, ha'elohim; 1 
Kings 18:39)—He could not be compared with any others. While Yahweh was an אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim), He 
was unique among the אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim). The orthodox Israelite knew that only one deity was the pre-
existent Creator of all things (Isa 45:18). His status as Creator prevented other אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) from 
being equal. Yahweh was viewed as the Creator of the “host of heaven,” the other divine beings (Pss 
33:6; 148:1–5; compare Neh 9:6; Job 38:7–8; 1 Kgs 22; Isa 14:13; Deut 4:19–20; 32:8–9, 43; with Deut 
17:3; 29:25; 32:17). 
Understanding the Term אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) 
The Confusion of English Translations. Modern English translations often obscure the Hebrew text’s 
plural אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim), probably from a fear that it would undermine a belief in monotheism. For 
example, the NASB renders the second אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) in Psa 82:1 as “rulers.” Other translations are 
more faithful, opting for “gods” or “divine beings,” but study Bibles usually note alternative readings like 
“rulers” or “judges.” While rendering the second אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) “gods” in Psa 82:1, the NIV 
nevertheless in Psa 29:1 has “mighty ones” for bĕnê ʾēlı , m (literally “sons of the gods”). NASB (“sons of 
the mighty”) and NKJV (“mighty ones”) follow suit. The translations for Deut 32:17 are also obscure. 
There are two issues: whether to render ֹ ַאֱ ֹלֹ֔ ה (eloah) as singular or plural and how to translate the 
verbless clause in which it appears ֹ ַל ֹ ֹ֣ אֹאֱ ֹלֹ֔ ה (lo' eloah). For example: 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 7.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
• ESV—“They sacrificed to demons that were no gods, to gods they had never known …” 
• RSV—“They sacrificed to demons which were no gods, to gods they had never known …” 
• CEV—“You offered sacrifices to demons, those useless gods that never helped you, new gods that 
your ancestors never worshiped.” 
Translations which translate ֹ ַאֱ ֹלֹ֔ ה (eloah) as plural produce a reading that denies that שֵ דִ ים (shedim, 
“demons”) are gods. Such translations, however, are forced to juxtapose this denial with the next 
clause, אֱ ֹלהִִ֖ יםֹל ֹ ֹ֣ אֹיְדָ ע֑ ּום (elohim lo' yeda'um) (“gods which they did not know”) which appears to 
clearly contradict that denial. How can the demons be gods and not gods in the same verse? 
Translations which take ֹ ַאֱ ֹלֹ֔ ה (eloah) as singular do not suffer this tension. There are in fact no 
occasions in the Hebrew Bible where ֹ ַאֱ לֹוה (eloha) is contextually plural or is used as a collective noun 
(Heiser, “Deuteronomy 32:17”). Denying the existence of gods in Deut 32:17 means denying the 
existence of these demonic entities. 
The Variety of אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim). There are a number of entities referred to as אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) in the 
Hebrew Bible. This variety gives a clue as to how the term should be understood. It can be used to 
mean: 
• Yahweh, the God of Israel (over 2000 times) 
• The אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) of Yahweh’s heavenly council (Psa 82) 
• The gods of foreign nations (e.g., 1 Kgs 11:33) 
• Demons (Deut 32:17) 
• Spirits of the human dead (1 Sam 28:13) 
• Angels (possible due to Gen 35:7, depending on the context of the plural predicator with אֱ ֹלהִ ים, 
elohim; subject) 
The אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) of Yahweh’s council in Psa 82 are divine beings, not human rulers. This is obvious 
from the parallel passage in Psa 89:5–8. In Psalm 82:6, the plural אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) are called “sons of 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 8.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
the Most High.” These אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) are not human since Psa 89:6 (Psa 89:7 in Hebrew) locates their 
assembly or council in the clouds or heavens (בַ שַ חַ ק, vashshachaq) not on earth. 
With respect to 1 Samuel 28:13 (part of the “medium of Endor” narrative), the text tells us that, 
after being solicited by Saul to conjure the dead prophet Samuel, the medium exclaims, ֹאֱ ֹלהִ ים
רָ אִ יתִ יֹעֹלִ יםֹמִ ן־הָ אָ רֶ ץ (elohim ra'ithiy olim min-ha'arets). The text could be translated two ways: “I 
saw gods coming up from the earth” or, “I saw a god coming up from the earth.” Both are possible since 
the plural participle form could reflect the plural morphology of אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim). Saul’s subsequent 
question helps us decide with a singular reading since he asks the medium in 28:14, “What is his (third 
masculine singular suffix) appearance?” The deceased Samuel who appears to Saul is an אֱ ֹלהִ ים 
(elohim). While this might seem strange to us, the notion that the departed dead were “gods” (אֱ ֹלהִ ים, 
elohim) is similar to ancient Canaanite thinking. 
In Genesis 35:7, אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) is the subject of a plural verb; and angels (מַ לְ אָ כִ ים, mal'akhim) 
may be part of the context. Genesis 35:1–7 reads in part: 
“God said to Jacob, ‘ (‘)Arise, go up to Bethel and dwell there. Make an altar there to the God (לָ אֵ ל, 
la'el) who appeared to you when you fled from your brother Esau.’ So Jacob said to his household … ‘ 
(‘)let us arise and go up to Bethel, so that I may make there an altar to the God (לָ אֵ ל, la'el) who 
answered me in the day of my distress and has been with me wherever I have gone.’ And Jacob came to 
Luz (that is, Bethel), which is in the land of Canaan, he and all the people who were with him, and there 
he built an altar and called the place El-bethel, because there God had revealed himself to him (or, “the 
gods revealed themselves to him”; נִ גְלּוֹאֵ לָ יוֹהָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, niglu elaiw ha'elohim) when he fled from his 
brother.” 
This passage is not referring to Gen 28—that was not the episode in which Jacob was explicitly 
described as fleeing from his brother. It seems to refer to Gen 32, in which Jacob has two encounters 
with the divine while fleeing from Esau. The lesser known of these two encounters occurs in Gen 32:1, 
where we read, “Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God (מַ לְ אֲ כֵ יֹאֱ ֹלהִ ים, mal'akhey elohim) 
met him” (ESV). Upon seeing these beings, Jacob’s response was the exclamation, “This is the camp of 
elohim” (Gen 32:1). In Genesis 32:22–32, Jacob wrestles with “a man” (Gen 32:24) whom Jacob refers to 
as elohim (32:32). The divine nature of the man is reiterated in Hos 12:3–4 (12:4–5 in Hebrew). This 
angel is also apparently deified in Gen 48:15–16 (ESV): 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 9.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
“And he blessed Joseph, and said, ‘ (‘)God (הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, ha'elohim), before whom my fathers 
Abraham and Isaac walked, the God (הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, ha'elohim) who has been my shepherd all my life long 
to this day, The angel (הַ מַ לְ אָ ְך, hammal'akh) who has redeemed me from all evil, bless (יְבָ רֵ ְך, 
yevarekh; note the singular verb) the boys; and in them let my name be carried on, and the name of my 
fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.’ ” 
The plural verb form of Gen 35:7 may be due to the fact that both Yahweh and the Angel who is the 
visible Yahweh appeared to Jacob as he fled. However, the other angels of God may also be included in 
the plural verb form. Angels as אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) would agree with Canaanite culture and religion, and 
makes good sense in light of what the term אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) really means. 
Defining the Term אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim). The fact that five different entities are called אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) 
shows that the word does not refer to only one set of attributes. This is the mistake of modern 
interpreters and translators, who are accustomed to using the term “god” only when referencing the 
God of Israel and His attributes. The biblical writers would not equate Yahweh in a qualitative sense with 
demons, angels, the human disembodied dead, the gods of the nations, or the gods of Yahweh’s own 
council. 
All the things called אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) in the Hebrew Bible have one thing in common: they all 
inhabit the non-human realm. That is, they are by nature not part of the world of humankind, a world of 
ordinary embodiment. אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) as a term describes residence—it identifies the proper domain 
of the entity described by it. Yahweh, the lesser gods, angels, demons, and the disembodied dead are all 
rightful inhabitants of the spiritual world. They may cross over to the human world, as Scripture informs 
us, and certain humans may be transported to their realm (e.g., prophets; Enoch), but their proper 
domain and humanity’s proper domain are two separate places. Within the spiritual world—as in the 
human world—there are differences of rank and power. Yahweh is an אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim), but no other 
אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) is Yahweh. This was what an orthodox Israelite believed. Yahweh was not one among 
equals; He was unique. The modern term “monotheism,” coined in the 17th century (MacDonald, 
“Deuteronomy and the Meaning of Monotheism,” 1–21), only uses the term god to describe a being 
with attributes like Yahweh’s. This does not reflect the Hebrew Bible’s use of אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim). 
However, the thought behind the term—that Yahweh is utterly and eternally unique—is consistent with 
the sense of the modern word “monotheism.” 
“No Other Gods beside Me”? 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 10.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
Common phrases in the Hebrew Bible which seem to deny the existence of other gods (e.g., Deut 4:35, 
39; 32:12, 39) actually appear in passages that affirm the existence of other gods (Deut 4:19–20; 32:8–9, 
17). These phrases show that Yahweh is incomparable among the other אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim), not that the 
biblical writers contradict each other or that they are in the process of discovering monotheism. 
Isaiah’s “denial statements” express incomparability, not non-existence of other gods (Isa 43:10–
12). Similar language is used in Isa 47:8, 10. Babylon claims, “I am, and there is none else beside me.” 
The claim is not that Babylon is the only city in the world, but that it has no rival. 
A close reading of Deuteronomy and Isaiah shows the denial language’s context (Heiser, 
“Monotheism”). The denials are not based on any claim that other אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) do not exist, but on 
Yahweh’s unique qualities. In Isaiah 43:10–12, the reference points are Yahweh’s pre-existence, ability 
to save, and national deliverance. In Isaiah 45, the focus is on Yahweh’s justice, salvation, the 
deliverance of His children, and the impotence of the other gods. Yahweh is being compared to lesser 
gods—it would be empty praise to compare Him to beings that did not exist. 
Human Beings as אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim)? The structure and terminology of Psa 82 shows that the psalm 
describes a council of divine beings (Mullen, “Divine Council”; Prinsloo, “Psalm 82”; Tsevat, “God and the 
Gods”; Kee, “The Heavenly Council”). The plural אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) of Psa 82:1 are called “sons of the 
Most High” in 82:6. The orthodox Israelite knew that the Most High is Yahweh (Psa 83:18). The plural 
אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) of the council are therefore “sons” of the God of Israel. Elsewhere the “sons of God” 
are obviously divine beings (e.g., Job 1:6; 2:1; 38:7–8). However, there is one passage, Hos 1:10, that 
uses a similar phrase of humans (“sons of the living God”), and Israelites on occasion were referred to as 
Yahweh’s “sons” (Exod 4:22–23). 
Psalm 82 and Psalm 89 in Tandem. Psalm 82’s council of plural אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) would be ambiguous if 
it were the only example. Without context, it might seem to describe Yahweh presiding over a council or 
group of human judges. However, there is another passage that both uses the same language of divine 
plurality in a council and rules out that language with human beings. 
Psalm 89:5–7 places Yahweh’s council of אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) “in the clouds.” This shows that these 
“sons of God” are not humans—no text in the entirety of the Hebrew Bible suggests that there are a 
group of human judges in the heavens ruling with Yahweh over the nations. 
Deuteronomy 32 as the Backdrop to Psalm 82. Psalm 82 judges the council אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) for their 
corrupt administration—this also shows that they are not human. The last verse of the psalm shows 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 11.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
what the council אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) were supposed to be administrating. The psalmist implores the God 
of Israel to rise up and “inherit” all the nations. The lemma behind “inherit” (נחל, nchl) is precisely the 
same lemma used to describe Yahweh’s punitive judgment of the nations at the tower of Babel. He 
allotted the nations to the sons of God, and allotted those same divine beings to the nations that he was 
disinheriting. The key passages are Deut 32:8–9 and its parallel, Deut 4:19–20: 
• Deuteronomy 32:8: “When the Most High gave to the nations their inheritance (נחל, nchl), when 
he divided mankind, he fixed the borders of the peoples according to the number of the sons of God 
(בניֹהאלהים, bny h'lhym) But the LORD’s portion is his people, Jacob his allotted heritage 
(נַ חֲ לָ תֹו, nachalatho).” 
• Deuteronomy 4:19: “Lest you lift up your eyes to heaven, and when you see the sun and the moon 
and the stars, all the host of heaven, you be drawn away and bow down to them and serve them, 
whom the LORD your God has allotted to all the peoples under the whole heaven. But the LORD has 
taken you and brought you out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be a people of his own 
inheritance (נַ חֲ לָ ה, nachalah), as you are this day.” 
Both of these passages assume the reality of other אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim). Passages in Deut 4:19–20 through 
32:8–9 identify the “host of heaven” as “other gods” (אֱ ֹלהִ ֹ֣ יםֹאֲ חֵ רִ ֹ֔ ים, elohim acherim) worshiped by 
Israelites in defiance of Deut 4:19–20. For example, Deut 29:23–25 (Deut 29:24–26 in English) contains 
phrases found in Deut 32:8–9, where the nations were allotted by Yahweh to the sons of God: 
“All the nations will say, ‘ (‘)Why has the LORD done thus to this land? What caused the heat of this 
great anger?’ Then people will say, ‘ (‘)It is because they abandoned the covenant of the LORD, the God 
of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them out of the land of Egypt, and went 
and served other gods (אֱ ֹלהִ ֹ֣ יםֹאֲ חֵ רִ ֹ֔ ים, elohim acherim) and worshiped them, gods whom they had 
not known and whom he had not allotted to them.’ ” 
Deuteronomy 32:17 identifies these ֹֹ֣ ִאֱ ֹלה
ים (elohim) (the hosts of heaven and sons of God) as 
demons—real beings (Heiser, “Deuteronomy 32:17”). These אֱ ֹלהִ ֹ֣ ים (elohim) are not simply idols, 
pieces of wood and stone. 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 12.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
Ancient Near Eastern idolaters knew that idols were not the actual deities they represent. While 
both the entity and the cult object might be called אֱ ֹלהִ ֹ֣ ים (elohim), this does not mean that ancient 
people considered a human-made statue to be identical to the god it looked like. As Robins, a scholar of 
ancient cult objects notes: “When a non-physical being manifested in a statue, this anchored the being 
in a controlled location where living human beings could interact with it through ritual performance … In 
order for human beings to interact with deities and to persuade them to create, renew, and maintain 
the universe, these beings had to be brought down to earth.… This interaction had to be strictly 
controlled in order to avoid both the potential dangers of unrestricted divine power and the pollution of 
the divine man realm was brought about through their manifestation in a physical body, manifestation 
in one body did not in any sense restrict a deity, for the non-corporeal essence of a by the impurity of 
the human world. While the ability of deities to act in the visible, human realm was brought about 
through their manifestation in a physical body, manifestation in one body did not in any sense restrict a 
deity, for the non-corporeal essence of a deity was unlimited by time and space, and could manifest in 
all its ‘ (‘)bodies,’ in all locations, all at one time” (Robins, “Cult Statues in Ancient Egypt,” 1–2). 
Human Elder-Judges of Israel and Plural אֱ ֹלהִ ֹ֣ ים (elohim). There are passages that seem to use 
ֹאֱ ֹל
הִ ֹ֣ ים (elohim) to mean the human elders of Israel acting as judges, but this is not the correct reading. 
Exodus 22:6–8 (translation from the JPS Tanakh): 
“When a man gives money or goods to another for safekeeping, and they are stolen from the man’s 
house—if the thief is caught, he shall pay double; if the thief is not caught, the owner of the house shall 
come near to God (הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, ha'elohim) that he has not laid hands on the other’s property. In all 
charges of misappropriation—pertaining to an ox, an ass, a sheep, a garment, or any other loss, whereof 
one party alleges, ‘ (‘)This is it’—the case of both parties shall come before God (הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, ha'elohim): 
he whom God (אֱ ֹלהִ ים, elohim) declares guilty ( ֹ יַרְ שִ יע
ן, yarshi'un) shall pay double to the other.” 
If the אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) and הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים (ha'elohim) in Exod 22:6–8 were human beings (the elder-
judges of Israel), Psa 82 may be describing Israelite judges. The plural predicate in Exod 22:8 (יַרְ שִ יע  ן, 
yarshi'un) would seem to support this—if the passage speaks of Israel’s judges rendering decisions for 
the people. However, there are several problems with this use of the passage. 
First, these judges (if הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, ha'elohim; and אֱ ֹלהִ ים, elohim; are plural and referring to people) 
give decisions for the nation of Israel—not the nations of the world as is the case in Psa 82 and Deut 32. 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 13.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
Also, אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) and הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים (ha'elohim) in Exod 22:8 might be singular, and might not refer to 
human beings. 
Exodus 18:13–24—where Moses appoints judges—might suggest that אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) and 
הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים (ha'elohim) in Exod 22:8 are humans. However, the story of the judges uses אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) 
and הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים (ha'elohim) to refer to God: 
“The next day, Moses sat as magistrate among the people, while the people stood about Moses 
from morning until evening. But when Moses’ father-in-law saw how much he had to do for the people, 
he said, ‘ (‘)What is this thing that you are doing to the people? Why do you act alone, while all the 
people stand about you from morning until evening? Moses replied to his father-in-law, ‘ (‘)It is because 
the people come to me to inquire of God (אֱ ֹלהִ ים, elohim). When they have a dispute, it comes before 
me, and I decide between one person and another, and I make known the laws and teachings of God.’ 
But Moses’ father-in-law said to him, ‘ (‘)The thing you are doing is not right; you will surely wear 
yourself out, and these people as well. For the task is too heavy for you; you cannot do it alone. Now 
listen to me. I will give you counsel, and God (אֱ ֹלהִ ים, elohim) be with you! You represent the people 
before God (הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, ha'elohim): you bring the disputes before God (הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, ha'elohim) and 
enjoin upon them the laws and the teachings, and make known to them the way they are to go and the 
practices they are to follow. You shall also seek out from among all the people capable men who fear 
God, trustworthy men who spurn ill-gotten gain. Set these over them as chiefs of thousands, hundreds, 
fifties, and tens, and let them judge the people at all times. Have them bring every major dispute to you, 
but let them decide every minor dispute themselves. Make it easier for yourself by letting them share 
the burden with you. If you do this—and God so commands you—you will be able to bear up; and all 
these people too will go home unwearied.’ Moses heeded his father-in-law and did just as he had said.” 
There is nothing in Exodus 18 to suggest that אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) or הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים (ha'elohim) are plural—
these refer to the singular God of Israel. The same is true of Exodus 22. A singular translation referring to 
God Himself is the correct reading. Without evidence for a plural translation, the אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) 
cannot be assumed to be the elders of Israel. Also, the men appointed by Moses in Exod 18 are never 
actually called אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) or 
ֹהָ אֱ ֹל
הִ ים (ha'elohim) in the text. This account of the appointment of 
judges, then, does not support the אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) in Psa 82 being humans. 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 14.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
There is one other passage that speaks of אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) in a context similar to that of Exod 22:8. 
Exodus 21:2–6 reads: 
“When you buy a Hebrew slave, he shall serve six years, and in the seventh he shall go out free, for 
nothing. If he comes in single, he shall go out single; if he comes in married, then his wife shall go out 
with him. If his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daughters, the wife and her children 
shall be her master’s, and he shall go out alone. But if the slave plainly says, ‘ (‘)I love my master, my 
wife, and my children; I will not go out free,’ then his master shall bring him to God (הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, 
ha'elohim), and he shall bring him to the door or the doorpost. And his master shall bore his ear through 
with an awl, and he shall be his slave forever.” 
It is possible that the master is commanded to bring the slave before the elder-judges of Israel 
(הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים, ha'elohim) before piercing his ear. However, this unlikely. 
First, הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים (ha'elohim) can be singular, referring to the God of Israel—as in Exod 18 and Exod 
22. The promise about the status of the slave is being made in truth before God. However, there is 
evidence that the redactor-scribes responsible for the final form of the text did not interpret הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים 
(ha'elohim) as singular—and also did not interpret a plurality as referring to human beings. The parallel 
passage in Deut 15 shows that redactors saw הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים (ha'elohim) as semantically plural: the parallel in 
Deut 15:17 removes the word הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים (ha'elohim) from the instruction. If this were thought to mean 
the God of Israel, the redactors would not have removed it from the text. Again, if הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים 
(ha'elohim) had been understood as plural humans, Israel’s judges, they would not have removed it. If 
הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים (ha'elohim) were intended as a semantically plural word that referred to gods, then the 
reason for deleting was theological (Gordon, “אלהים, 'lhym; in Its Reputed Meaning of Rulers”). 
Gordon argued that הָ אֱ ֹלהִ ים (ha'elohim) in Exod 21:6 referred to “household gods” like the teraphim 
of other passages. Bringing a slave into one’s home in patriarchal culture required the consent and 
approval of one’s ancestors—departed human dead, ִֹאֱ ֹלה
ים (elohim)—as in 1 Sam 28:13. This phrase 
was later removed after Israel’s struggle with idolatry. Only a plural referring to multiple divine beings 
can coherently explain the deletion. As a result, this passage also does not support the plural human 
אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) view. 
Prophets and the Divine Council 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 15.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
Prophetic Commissioning: The Classical Prophets. There is also a connection between the divine council 
and the office of prophet (1 Kings 22). 
A prophet or prophetess was a spokesperson for Yahweh. They were commissioned in an encounter 
with the divine: the prophet appeared in the divine throne room, where the council met and decrees 
were issued (Kingsbury, “Prophets and the Council of Yahweh”; Nissinen, “Prophets and the Divine 
Council”). Isaiah was taken to the throne-room of Yahweh (Isa 6:1–8), and the throne of the LORD came 
to Ezekiel (Ezek 1:1–14, 26–28). Jeremiah was called by the word of the Lord (Jer 1:4). This word was 
Yahweh (Jer 1:6–7), but was embodied in human form (Jer 1:9). Yahweh refers to this call when He said 
of the false prophets, “If they had stood in my council, then they would have proclaimed my words to 
my people, and they would have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their deeds” (Jer 
23:16, 22). 
Prophetic Commissioning: The Broader Context. Someone who serves as the righteous spokesperson 
for God is also a prophet. God often meets with humans for spiritual business in the Bible: 
• God walked with Adam in the garden, the divine abode. He was God’s first human representative. 
Job 15:7–8 apparently alludes to this scene, as Eliphaz, one of Job’s friends, asks Job, “Are you the 
first man who was born? Or were you brought forth before the hills? Have you listened in the 
council (הַ בְ סֹוד, havsod) of God? Have you restricted wisdom to yourself?” 
• Enoch “prophesied” (Jude 14; 15) and “walked with God” (Gen 5:24). 
• Noah also “walked with God” (Gen 6:9). He was a “herald of righteousness” (2 Pet 2:5), and warned 
his fellow men of the coming judgment of the flood (1 Pet. 3:20). 
• The glory of Lord “appeared” to Abraham before he journeyed to Haran (Acts 7:2–4; Gen 15:1). 
• Yahweh appeared to Isaac (Gen 26:1–5) and Jacob (Gen 28:10–22; 31:11–13; 32:22–32; see Hos 
12:3–4). The patriarchs were Yahweh’s spokesmen, through whom the world would be blessed (Gen 
12:1–3). 
• He commissioned Moses at the burning bush (Exod 3:1–15) and many subsequent occasions (e.g., 
19:16–20:21; 24:9–18; 33:7–11). 
• Yahweh also directly commissioned the elders of Israel under Moses (Num 11:24–25). 
• He also commissioned Joshua (Deut 31:14–23; Josh 5:13–15). 
• Gideon met both Yahweh and the angel who was Yahweh—simultaneously (Judges 6). 
• Deborah received messages from Yahweh under “the Palm of Deborah” (Judg 4:4–5). 
• The word of the Lord “appeared” to Samuel to inform him of Eli’s fate (1 Sam 3:20–21). 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 16.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
The Divine Council as Prophetic Warriors and Witnesses. The prophets sometimes refer to the divine 
council when they declare eschatological holy war (Miller, “Call to War”). The divine council (along with 
human warriors) forms a cosmic army on the day of the Lord (Isa 13:1–8; Joel 3:11–12; Zech 14:1–5). 
This language draws upon other material in the Hebrew Bible that describes the divine council as an 
army (Deut 33:1–5; Psa 68:16–17; 2 Kgs 6:15–17). This is also the context for the common title for 
Israel’s God, “Lord of hosts”—“host” is a word used frequently in the Hebrew Bible for a military force 
(e.g., 2 Sam 3:23; Psa 108:12). 
The divine council is the army of God, but also witnesses God’s decrees and acts. This idea is 
common outside the Hebrew Bible in other descriptions of divine councils (Bokovy, “Invoking the 
Council as Witnesses”). God often commands an unidentified group in a context that rules out a human 
audience (Cross, “The Council of Yahweh”). “Comfort, comfort my people, says your God” (Isa 40:1–2). 
The two imperatives “comfort” are grammatically plural in Hebrew, as are the ensuing commands 
“Speak tenderly to Jerusalem and cry to her” (Isa 40:3). These commands are not directed at Jerusalem 
or Israel, for they are the objects of the commands—they may be directed at the divine council (Cross, 
“The Council of Yahweh”). Amos 3 describes the Lord’s intention to punish Israel. In Amos 3:7, we read 
that “the Lord God does nothing without revealing his council (סֹוד, sod) to the prophets.” Plural 
imperatives follow: “Proclaim to the strongholds … and say” and “Hear and testify against the house of 
Jacob, declares the Lord God, the God of hosts” (Amos 3:10; 3:13). Again, Israel and Judah are not the 
recipient of the commands—the divine council may be called upon to witness the judgment of the Lord 
(Bokovy, “Invoking the Council as Witnesses”). 
The Divine Council and New Testament Views of Christ 
The binitarian structure of the Israelite divine council has implications for the high view of Christ in the 
New Testament (Segal, “Trinitarian”; Stuckenbruck, “Angel”; Boyarin, “Memra”) 
The Second Power in Heaven / Second Yahweh. A number of Jewish writers ca. 516 BC—AD 70 offered 
opinions as to the identity of the “second Yahweh,” the second power in heaven (Mach, “Concepts of 
Jewish Monotheism”; Hurtado, “How on Earth”; McGrath, The Only True God; Fossum, “Name”). These 
Jewish writers suggested significant men from the Old Testament—such as Adam, Enoch, Abraham, and 
Moses—and specific angels—Gabriel, Michael, and the “Prince of the Host” from Daniel 10. Some did 
not attempt to further identify the angel of Yahweh (Gieschen, Angelomorphic Christology; Hannah, 
Michael and Christ; Stuckenbruck, “Angel”). 
For Christians, the second Yahweh was Jesus. It is for this reason that the New Testament describes 
Jesus with all the descriptions of Yahweh’s co-regent: the name (which Jesus manifests by his presence: 
John 17:6, 11–12, 26), the word (John 1:1), the cloud-rider (Matt 26:64), wisdom (1 Cor 1:24), and the 
angel of Yahweh (Jude 5; Num 14:29; Fossum, “Name”; Fossum, “Image”; Segal, “Two Powers”; Boyarin, 
“Memra”). 
Jesus as the Unique Son of God (μονογενής, monogenēs). Jesus is the “only begotten” son of God—but 
“only begotten” is a confusing translation. The Greek word is μονογενής (monogenēs). Not only does the 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 17.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
translation “only begotten” seem to contradict the obvious statements in the Old Testament about 
other sons of God, it sounds as though there was a time when the Son did not exist—that He had a 
beginning. The Council of Nicaea in 425 taught that the Son had always existed, but the idea of the 
uncreated, eternal Son had been understood since the beginning of the Church—it was believed to be 
the teaching of the New Testament. 
The Greek word μονογενής (monogenēs) doesn’t actually mean “only begotten.” It presents a 
problem neither with respect to Jesus having a beginning, nor with respect to divine “sons of God” who 
are called gods (אֱ ֹלהִ ים, elohim) in the Old Testament. The confusion extends from a misunderstanding 
of the root of the Greek word. For many years, μονογενής (monogenēs) was thought to have derived 
from two Greek terms, μόνος (monos, “only”) and γεννάω (gennaō, “to beget, bear”). Scholars of Greek 
eventually discovered, though, that the second part of the word μονογενής (monogenēs) does not come 
from the Greek verb γεννάω (gennaō), but rather the noun γένος (genos, “class, kind”). The term literally 
means “one of a kind” or “unique” with no connotation to time, origin or solitary existence. The validity 
of this understanding is shown by the New Testament itself. In Hebrews 11:17, Isaac is called Abraham’s 
μονογενής (monogenēs)—but Isaac was not the only son Abraham fathered, since he fathered Ishmael 
prior to Isaac. The term must mean that Isaac was Abraham’s unique son—the son of the covenant 
promises and the line through which the messiah would come. Just as Yahweh is an אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim), 
and no other אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) are Yahweh, so Jesus is the unique son, and no other sons of God are like 
Him. 
Jesus’ Quotation of Psalm 82 in John 10. John 10:34 may seem to imply that the אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) in Psa 
82:6 are human beings. However, this interpretation nullifies any sense that Jesus’ argument in John 10 
is a defense of His own deity. In John 10:30, Jesus tells his audience that He and the Father were one. 
The Jews were deeply offended by this comment, as indicated by their response in 10:31–33. They 
picked up stones to kill Him, for they thought He was making Himself equal with God. Jesus’ response is 
usually interpreted as a concession. That is, He was only saying of Himself what the Jews could say of 
themselves, and used Psa 82:6 to show that humans can be called אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim). This view both 
ignores the Old Testament context of the divine council and undermines John’s presentation of the deity 
of Jesus in his gospel: 
• Jesus’ asserted that He and the Father were one (Jn 10:30). 
• The Jews thought this was blasphemy—Jesus was claiming to be God (Jn 10:33). 
• In defense of His claim that He was one with God, Jesus quoted Psa 82:6. 
• Following the quotation, He states that the Father is in Him, and He was in the Father. 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 18.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
The usual interpretation of this passage—that the אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) were human—is based on two 
assumptions: 
1. Judaeo-Christian monotheism could not have other אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim). 
2. “To whom the word of God came” refers to the Jews who received the law at Sinai (i.e. the 
Pharisees’ forefathers). 
However, both of these assumptions are wrong. It is already clear that there were other uses of אֱ ֹלהִ ים 
(elohim). Also, “the word of God” was not the Law, and those who received it were not human. Psalm 
82:6–7 says, “I said, ‘ (‘)You are gods (אֱ ֹלהִ ים, elohim), even sons of the Most High (בְ נֵיֹעֶ לְ יֹון, beney 
elyon), all of you; nevertheless, like humans you will die, and fall like any prince.’ ” 
The speaker (“I”) in the passage is the God of Israel, the God who is standing in the council in 82:1 
among the lesser אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim). God announces that the אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) of the council are His 
sons, but because of their corruption (Psa 82:2–5), they will lose their immortality. The “word of God” in 
the original context is the specific utterance of Yahweh to His council members. They, in turn, are the 
recipients of that word (utterance). The recipients are not the Israelites at Sinai or any other group of 
Jews. 
Jesus refers to the original utterance spoken by God when He quoted the psalm, not the Jewish 
nation receiving revelation, at Sinai or at any other time. Jesus is defending his statement to be one with 
the Father by reminding his hearers that their Old Testament teaches that there were divine sons of God 
who were אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim). 
Differences in the views: 
Common Interpretation 
This Proposal 
Jesus’ strategy assumes אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) are 
human 
Jesus’ strategy assumes אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) are 
divine 
The “word of God that came” = revelation from 
God at Sinai, or some other event 
The “word of God that came” = the utterance 
itself in Psa 82:6—the pronouncement from 
God 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 19.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
“to whom the word of God came” = the 
Israelites at Sinai, or the Jews generally 
“to whom the word of God came” = the 
אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) of the divine council in 82:1 
The Jews are the “sons of the Most High” and 
אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim)—so Jesus can call himself an 
אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) as well, since he’s a Jew. (This 
view emphasizes Jesus’ mortality) 
The Jews are not אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim), and Jesus 
reminds them that their Scriptures say there are 
other אֱ ֹלהִ ים (elohim) who are divine sons. 
In John 10:36–38, Jesus asserts that his high status as the Son is based on Him doing the works of His 
Father: the Father is “in him.” This phrase parallels Exod 23:20–21, where the Name—Yahweh’s 
Presence—was in the angel of Yahweh. In John 10:36–38, Jesus claims that the Presence is in Him. He is 
claiming to be the second power, or second Yahweh, which would in turn mean He was Lord of the 
divine council with the invisible Yahweh (the Father). Thus, Jesus’ claim of oneness with the Father is 
developed by the quotation and by what follows. The result is a powerful claim to deity, consistent with 
the rest of the gospel of John. 
Bibliography 
Ackerman, James S. “The Rabbinic Interpretation of Psalm 82 and the Gospel of John.” Harvard 
Theological Review 59:2 (1966): 186–191. 
Bokovy, David E. “Invoking the Council as Witnesses in Amos 3:13.” Journal of Biblical Literature 127:1 
(2008): 37–51 
Boyarin, Daniel. “The Gospel of the Memra: Jewish Binitarianism and the Prologue to John.” Harvard 
Theological Review 94:3 (2001): 243–284. 
Boyarin, Daniel. “Two Powers in Heaven; Or, the Making of a Heresy,” Pages 331–370 in The Idea of 
Biblical Interpretation: Essays in Honor of James L. Kugel. Edited by Hindy Najman and Judith H. 
Newman. Leiden: Brill, 2004. 
Burnett, Joel. A Reassessment of Biblical Elohim. Atlanta: Society of Biblical Literature, 2001. 
Cho, Sang Youl. Lesser Deities in the Ugaritic Texts and the Hebrew Bible. New Jersey: Gorgias Press, 
2007. 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 20.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
Clifford, Richard J. The Cosmic Mountain in Canaan and the Old Testament. Harvard Semitic Mongraphs 
4. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1972. 
Cooke, Gerald. “The Sons of (the) God(s),” Zeitschrift für die Alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 76 (1964): 
22–47. 
Cross, Frank Moore. “The Council of Yahweh in Second Isaiah,” Journal of Near Eastern Studies 12 
(1953): 274–277 
Cross, Frank Moore. “Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic.” Harvard, 1973. 
Davis, Carl Judson. The Name and Way of the Lord: Old Testament Themes, New Testament Christology. 
Journal for the Study of the New Testament Supplemental Series 129. Continuum / Sheffield 
Academic Press, 1996. 
Day, John. Yahweh and the Gods and Goddesses of Canaan. Journal for the Study of the Old Testament 
Supplemental Series 265. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1994. 
Day, Peggy. An Adversary in Heaven: śaṭan in the Hebrew Bible. Harvard Semitic Monographs 43: 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1988. 
Dever, William G. Did God Have a Wife? Archaeology and Folk Religion in Ancient Israel. Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 2005. 
Fossum, Jarl E. “In the Beginning was the Name: Onomanology as the Key to Johannine Christology,” 
Pages 109–134 in The Image of the Invisible God: Essays on the Influence of Jewish Mysticism on 
Early Christianity. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1995. 
Fossum, Jarl E. The Name of God and the Angel of the Lord: Samaritan and Jewish Concepts of 
Intermediation and the Origin of Gnosticism. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1985. 
Gieschen, Charles A. Angelomorphic Christology: Antecedents and Early Evidence. Leiden: Brill, 1998. 
Gordon, Cyrus H. “אלהים ('lhym) in Its Reputed Meaning of Rulers, Judges,” Journal of Biblical 
Literature 54 (1935): 139–44. 
Hamori, Esther J. “When Gods Were Men”: The Embodied God in Biblical and Near Eastern Literature. 
Berlin: Walter DeGruyter, 2008. 
Hamori, Esther J. “Divine Embodiment in the Hebrew Bible and Some Implications for Jewish and 
Christian Incarnational Theologies,” Pages 161–183 in Bodies, Embodiment, and Theology of the 
Hebrew Bible, ed. S. Tamar Kamionkowski and Wonil Kim. Library of the Hebrew Bible Old 
Testament Series 465. Continuum / T&T Clark, 2010. 
Hannah, Darrell D. Michael and Christ: Michael Traditions and Angel Christology in Early Christianity. 
Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 109. Tubingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1999. 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 21.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
Handy, Lowell K. “The Authorization of Divine Power and the Guilt of God in the Book of Job: Useful 
Ugaritic Parallels,” Journal for the Study of the Old Testament 60 (1993): 107–118 
Handy, Lowell K. Among the Host of Heaven: The Syro-Palestinian Pantheon as Bureaucracy. Winona 
Lake, Iowa: Eisenbrauns, 1994. 
Hartley, John E. The Book of Job. New International Critical Commentary of the Old Testament; Grand 
Rapids; Eerdmans, 1988. 
Heiser, Michael S. “Deuteronomy 32:8 and the Sons of God,” Bibliotheca Sacra 158 (2001): 52–74. 
Heiser, Michael S. “The Divine Council in Second Temple Literature,” Ph.D. diss., University of Wisconsin-
Madison, 2004. 
Heiser, Michael S. “Divine Council,” Dictionary of the Old Testament: Wisdom, Poetry, and Writings. 
Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press, 2008: 112–116. 
Heiser, Michael S. “Divine Council,” Dictionary of the Old Testament: Prophets. Downers Grove, Ill.: 
InterVarsity Press, 2011, forthcoming. 
Heiser, Michael S. “Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism? Toward an Assessment of 
Divine Plurality in the Hebrew Bible” Bulletin for Biblical Research 18:1 (2008): 1–30. 
Heiser, Michael S. “Does Deuteronomy 32:17 Assume or Deny the Reality of Other Gods?” Bible 
Translator 59:3 (July 2008): 137–145. 
Herrmann, W. “Rider Upon the Clouds,” Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 1999: 703–704. 
Hess, Richard S. “Yahweh and his Asherah? Epigraphic Evidence for Religious Pluralism in Old Testament 
Times,” in One God, One Lord in a World of Religious Pluralism, ed. A.D. Clarke and B.W. Winter. 
Cambridge: Tyndale House, 1991) 5–33. 
Huffmon, H. B. “Name.” Pages 610–611 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 1999. 
Hurtado, Larry W. One God, One Lord: Early Christian Devotion and Ancient Jewish Monotheism. 
Continuum / T&T Clark, 1988. 
Hurtado, Larry W. One God, One Lord: Early Christian Devotion and Ancient Jewish Monotheism. 
Philadelphia: Fortress, 1988. 
Hurtado, Larry W. “The Binitarian Shape of Early Christian Worship,” Pages 187–213 in The Jewish Roots 
of Christological Monotheism, Papers from the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical Origins of 
the Worship of Jesus, ed. Carey C. Newman, James R. Davila and Gladys S. Lewis. SupJSJ 63; Leiden: 
Brill, 1999. 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 22.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
Hurtado, Larry W. Lord Jesus Christ: Devotion to Jesus in Earliest Christianity. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 
2003. 
Hurtado, Larry W. How on Earth Did Jesus Become a God? Historical Questions about Earliest Jesus 
Devotion. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2005. 
Kee, Min Suc “The Heavenly Council and Its Type Scene,” Journal for the Study of the Old Testament 31:3 
(2007): 259–273 
Kingsbury, Edwin C. “The Prophets and the Council of Yahweh,” Journal of Biblical Literature 83:3 (1964): 
279–286 
Korpel, Marjo C. A. A Rift in the Clouds: Ugaritic and Hebrew Descriptions of the Divine. Münster: Ugarit-
Verlag, 1990. 
MacDonald, Nathan. “Deuteronomy and the Meaning of Monotheism“. Future American Theologians 2. 
Reihe 1: Mohr-Siebeck, 2003. 
Mach, Michael “Concepts of Jewish Monotheism during the Hellenistic Period,” Pages 21–42 in The 
Jewish Roots of Christological Monotheism, Papers from the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical 
Origins of the Worship of Jesus. Edited by Carey C. Newman, James R. Davila and Gladys S. Lewis. 
SupJSJ 63; Leiden: Brill, 1999. 
McGrath, James F. The Only True God: Early Christian Monotheism in Its Jewish Context. University of 
Illinois Press, 2009. 
Mettinger, Tryggve N. D. “The Dethronement of Sabaoth: Studies in the Shem and Kabod Theologies“. 
Coniectanea Biblia Old Testament Series 18. CWK Leerup, 1982. 
Miller, Patrick D. “The Divine Council and the Prophetic Call to War,” Vetus Testamentum 18 (1968): 
100–107. 
Miller, Patrick D. “Cosmology and World Order in the Old Testament and the Divine Council as Cosmic-
Political Symbol,” Pages 422–445 in Israelite Religion and Biblical Theology: Collected Essays. 
Continuum. Sheffield Academic Press, 2000. 
Mullen, E. Theodore Jr. The Divine Council in Canaanite and Early Hebrew Literature. Harvard Semitic 
Monographs 24; Chico, Calif.: Scholars Press, 1980. 
Mullen, E. Theodore Jr. “Divine Assembly,” Anchor Bible Dictionary 2.214–217. 
Nissinen, Martii “Prophets and the Divine Council,” in Kein Land für sich allein: Studien zum 
Kulturkontakt in Kanaan, IsraelPalästina und Ebirnari für Manfred Weippert zum 65. Geburstag/, 
edited by U. Hübner und E. A. Knauf. OBO 186; Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Rupprecht, 2002), 4–19. 
Parker, Simon B. “Sons of (the) God(s),” Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 1999): 794–798. 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Divine Council,” The Lexham Bible Dictionary, John D. Barry and Lazarus Wentz, eds. (Bellingham, WA: 
Lexham Press, 2012). Page 23.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:29 PM December 11, 2013. 
Prinsloo, W. S. “Psalm 82: Once Again, Gods or Men?” Bibliotheca Sacra 76:2 (1995): 219–228. 
Ringgren, Helmer. Word and Wisdom. Studies in the Hypostatization of Divine Qualities and Functions in 
the Ancient Near East. Lund 1947. 
Robins, Gay “Cult Statues in Ancient Egypt,” in Cult Image and Divine Representation in the Ancient Near 
East. American Schools of Oriental Research Book Series 10; ed. Neal H. Walls; Boston: American 
Schools of Oriental Research, 2005. 
Segal, Alan F. Two Powers in Heaven: Early Rabbinic Reports about Christianity and Gnosticism. Leiden: 
Brill, 1977. 
Segal, Alan F. “ ‘ (‘)Two Powers in Heaven’ and Early Christian Trinitarian Thinking,” Pages 73–98 in The 
Trinity. Edited by Stephen T. Davis, Daniel Kendall, Gerald O’Collins. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2004. 
Smith, Mark S. The Origins of Biblical Monotheism: Israel’s Polytheistic Background and the Ugaritic 
Texts. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. 
Smith, Mark S. The Early History of God: Yahweh and Other Deities in Ancient Israel. 2nd ed.; Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 2002. 
Smith, Mark S. God in Translation: Deities in Cross-Cultural Discourse in the Biblical World. Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 2010. 
Sommer, Benjamin D. The Bodies of God and the World of Ancient Israel. Cambridge, 2009. 
Stuckenbruck, Loren T. Angel Veneration and Christology: A Study in Early Judaism and in the Christology 
of the Apocalypse of John. WUNT 70, 2 Reihe; Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1995. 
Stuckenbruck, Loren T. and North, Wendy E. S. (eds). Early Jewish and Christian Monotheism. Continuum 
/ T&T Clark, 2004. 
Tsevat, Matitiahu. “God and the Gods in Assembly,” Hebrew Union College Annual 40–41 (1969–1970): 
123–137 Series 495; Continuum / T&T Clark, 2008. 
Wyatt, Nicholas. “The Titles of the Ugaritic Storm God,” Ugarit Forschungen 24 (1992): 403–424. 
MICHAEL S. HEISER 
 

---PAGE---
