Michael S. Heiser, “Understanding Israelite Monotheism,” Faithlife Study Bible, John D. Barry, Michael R. Grigoni, et al. 
(Bellingham, WA: Logos Bible Software, 2012). Page 1.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:37 PM December 11, 2013. 
Understanding Israelite Monotheism 
Old Testament affirmations such as Deut 6:4 (“Hear, O Israel, Yahweh our God is one”) and the 
prophets’ repeated statements that “there is none besides Yahweh,” can easily lead to the assumption 
that the OT Israelites did not believe in the existence of other gods. According to this assumption, the 
definition of monotheism rules out the existence of other gods. In light of many OT passages, these 
assumptions cannot be sustained. Rather than producing contradictions within the biblical text, these 
passages that are often set aside demonstrate how godly Israelites thought about Yahweh and provide a 
more accurate picture of Israelite monotheism. 
The Gods of the Old Testament 
The writers of the OT primarily use two plural nouns for a plurality of gods: elohim and elim. Here is a 
sampling of the many passages in which these terms occur. 
elohim 
 
elim 
 
Deut 32:17; Pss 82:1; 86:8; 95:3; 96:4; 97:7, 
9; 136.2; 138:1 
 
Exod 15:11; Psa 89:5–7 [Heb: vv. 6–8]; Psa 
29:1 
 
Deuteronomy 32:17 describes the gods (elohim) worshiping in disobedience as “demons” (shedim, low-
ranking divine beings known in other ancient Near Eastern texts). They are not merely idols of wood and 
stone. Elsewhere in Deuteronomy, the writer describes these “other gods” (acherim elohim) as the 
heavenly host (Deut 17:3). And the same heavenly host terminology also is used in references to actual 
spirit beings assembled in Yahweh’s presence (1 Kgs 22:19–23). Deuteronomy 4:19–20 and its explicit 
parallel, Deut 32:8–9, together demonstrate that the heavenly host terminology designates more than 
celestial objects: 
Lest you lift up your eyes to heaven, and when you see the sun and the moon and the 
stars, all the host of heaven, you be drawn away and bow down to them and serve 
them, whom the LORD your God has allotted to all the peoples under the whole heaven. 
But the LORD has taken you and brought you out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be 
a people of his own inheritance, as you are this day (Deut 4:19–20). 
These celestial objects are the gods of Deut 17:3 and 32:17. In Deut 32:8–9, the writer of 
Deuteronomy calls them “sons of God.” 
When the Most High gave to the nations their inheritance, when he divided mankind, he 
fixed the borders of the peoples according to the number of the sons of God. But the 
LORD’s portion is his people, Jacob his allotted heritage (Deut 32:8–9). 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Understanding Israelite Monotheism,” Faithlife Study Bible, John D. Barry, Michael R. Grigoni, et al. 
(Bellingham, WA: Logos Bible Software, 2012). Page 2.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:37 PM December 11, 2013. 
Deuteronomy 32:8 describes Yahweh’s dispersal of the nations at Babel and his resultant 
disinheriting of those nations, giving them over to other, lesser gods (elohim). Psalm 82, in turn, 
describes Yahweh’s end-times punishment of these gods for their corrupt rule of the nations. These 
passages are central to the OT‘s explanation for the existence of other nations’ pantheons. 
The starry host description of Deut 4:19–20 also occurs in Job 38:7, which refers to the presence of 
the “sons of God” at the creation of the foundations of the earth. “Sons of God” is a common 
designation for divine beings (compare Job 1:6; 2:1), and in Psa 82:6, the psalmist explicitly refers to the 
“sons of the Most High” as gods (elohim, compare Pss 82:1; 89:5–7). 
A. The Hebrew text of the OT uses the term elohim to refer to five different entities—even though 
this distinction is rarely clear in English translations: 
B. Yahweh, the God of Israel (more than 2,000 times) 
C. The gods of Yahweh’s heavenly council, both loyal and disloyal (Pss 82; 89; compare Deut 32:8–9, 
43; Psa 58:11) 
D. The gods of foreign nations (e.g., 1 Kgs 11:33) 
E. Demons (Deut 32:17) 
F. Spirits of dead people (1 Sam 28:13) 
G. Angels (see note on Gen 35:7) 
If the biblical writers could use elohim to refer to entities besides the God of Israel, then they did not 
equate the term “god” with only one entity. The biblical writers knew there was more than one elohim 
because they did not reserve the term only for the God of Israel: The faith of the biblical writers allowed 
for the existence of other gods (elohim). This also means that the modern term “monotheism” does not 
accurately capture the beliefs of the biblical writers. This disconnect is caused by the desire of modern 
readers to reserve the word god for one being, whereas the biblical writers did not necessarily share this 
desire. 
“Denial Statements” in the Old Testament 
Deuteronomy 4 and 32 (Deut 4:19–20; 32:8–9, 17), which play a central role in OT theology, affirm both 
the existence of other gods (elohim) and their antagonism toward the God of Israel. And yet both of 
these chapters use the sort of language that is often presumed to deny the existence of other gods: 
You were shown these things so that you might know that the LORD, he is the God; besides him 
there is no other (Deut 4:35). 
Know therefore this day, and lay it to your heart, that YHWH, he is the God in heaven above and 
on the earth beneath; there is no other (Deut 4:39). 

---PAGE---
Michael S. Heiser, “Understanding Israelite Monotheism,” Faithlife Study Bible, John D. Barry, Michael R. Grigoni, et al. 
(Bellingham, WA: Logos Bible Software, 2012). Page 3.  Exported from Logos Bible Software, 10:37 PM December 11, 2013. 
See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god beside me; I kill and I make alive; I wound and I 
heal; and there is none that can deliver out of my hand (Deut 32:39). 
These Hebrew “denial phrases” and a handful of similar ones scattered throughout the OT, rather 
than assert the nonexistence of other gods, contend that no other gods compare to Yahweh (compare 
Exod 15:11). The OT asserts the absolute and utterly incomparable uniqueness of Yahweh. No other god 
can claim to be uncreated or have His attributes. 
To illustrate, these same type of “denial statements” occur in reference to Babylon and Moab in Isa 
47:8, 10, and to Nineveh in Zeph 2:15. In Isa 47:8, 10, Babylon says to herself, “I am, and there is none 
else beside me.” Babylon certainly does not claim to be the only country in the world. Rather, Babylon 
asserts that she has no rival. Nineveh makes the identical claim in Zeph 2:15, even though there are 
other cities. 
Israelite Monotheism 
All the entities the Hebrew Bible called elohim have one thing in common: they all inhabit the 
nonhuman (heavenly) realm. The term elohim, then, is about a “place of residence”—it identifies the 
proper domain of the entity it describes. Yahweh, the lesser gods, angels, demons, and the disembodied 
(spiritual) dead people—all of these are rightful inhabitants of the disembodied, spiritual world. While 
they may be able to cross over to the world of people, as Scripture tells us, and while certain humans 
may be transported to their realm (e.g., prophets; Enoch), their proper domain and our proper domain 
are separate. 
The spiritual world also contains differentiation of rank and power. Consequently, Yahweh is an 
elohim, but no other elohim is Yahweh. There is only one Yahweh. He is not one among equals; He is 
“species unique.” That was what orthodox Israelites believed about Yahweh, and that is the meaning of 
biblical monotheism. 
MICHAEL S. HEISER 
 

---PAGE---
