Scholars Crossing 
Scholars Crossing 
LBTS Faculty Publications and Presentations 
2008 
Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism? Toward an 
Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism? Toward an 
Assessment of Divine Plurality in the Hebrew Bible 
Assessment of Divine Plurality in the Hebrew Bible 
Michael Heiser 
Liberty University, mshmichaelsheiser@gmail.com 
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.liberty.edu/lts_fac_pubs 
 Part of the Biblical Studies Commons, Comparative Methodologies and Theories Commons, Ethics in 
Religion Commons, History of Religions of Eastern Origins Commons, History of Religions of Western 
Origin Commons, Other Religion Commons, and the Religious Thought, Theology and Philosophy of 
Religion Commons 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Heiser, Michael, "Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism? Toward an Assessment of Divine 
Plurality in the Hebrew Bible" (2008). LBTS Faculty Publications and Presentations. 277. 
https://digitalcommons.liberty.edu/lts_fac_pubs/277 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by Scholars Crossing. It has been accepted for inclusion in 
LBTS Faculty Publications and Presentations by an authorized administrator of Scholars Crossing. For more 
information, please contact scholarlycommunications@liberty.edu. 

---PAGE---
Offprint from: Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1 (2008)
ç Copyright 2008 The Institute for Biblical Research. 
All rights reserved.
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1 (2008) 1–30
Monotheism, Polytheism, 
Monolatry, or Henotheism? 
Toward an Assessment of Divine Plurality
in the Hebrew Bible
michael s. heiser
academic editor, logos bible software
Israel’s view of God and his relationship to other divine beings in the He-
brew Bible has long been the subject of scholarly debate. The dominant
critical consensus since the late nineteenth century holds that Israel’s
faith evolved from polytheism or henotheism to monotheism. Passages in
the Hebrew Bible that assume the existence of other gods are compared to
other passages that put forth the declaration that “there are no other gods
besides” the God of Israel as proof of this view. Other scholars who reject
this evolutionary paradigm tend to assume passages evincing divine plu-
rality actually speak of human beings, or that the other gods are merely
idols. This view insists that “monotheism” must mean that the existence
of other gods is denied. Both views are problematic and fall short of doing
justice to the full description of Israel’s view of God and the heavenly host
in the Hebrew Bible. This article overviews the difﬁculties of each view
and offers a coherent alternative.
Key Words: monotheism, polytheism, henotheism, monolatry, divine
council, God, gods, angels, host of heaven, idols, Israelite religion, Psalm
82, Deuteronomy 32
Introduction
Most scholars whose work focuses on Israelite religion recognize that the
Hebrew Bible contains a number of references assuming and even af-
ﬁrming the existence of other gods. As a corollary to this observation,
scholars also frequently assert that no explicit denial of the existence of
other gods occurs until the time of Deutero-Isaiah and thereafter (6th
century b.c.e.) in a presumed campaign by zealous scribes to expunge
such references from the sacred text. Even the Shema and the ﬁrst com-
mandment do not consign the other gods to fantasy, since the demand is
made that no other gods should be worshipped. The data apparently in-

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
2
forms us that Israelite religion evolved from polytheism to henotheistic
monolatry to monotheism.
While this viewpoint dominates scholarly discussion of Israelite reli-
gion, the question ought to be asked whether it is lucid. Does the view-
point derive from the known data from earliest times into the Common
Era, or is the reasoning offered in its support circular? Are terms like
“polytheism” and “henotheism” truly adequate to describe what the writ-
ers of the biblical canon believed?
Treatments of the issue and the relevant passages by other Jewish and
Christian scholars often assume the biblical writers spoke only of idols
when discussing other gods, or that references to plural µyhIløa” in certain
passages are best understood as referring to human beings. These options
are also ﬂawed in that they bring theology to the text. These alternatives
assume that a 17th-century word (“monotheism”) has or can rightly be im-
posed on the theology of Israel and that, without this term, it must be ac-
knowledged that Israelite religion was indeed henotheistic or polytheistic.
This article argues that the consensus view on divine plurality in the
Hebrew Bible is marred because it assumes what it seeks to prove. It
thereby fails to handle the evidence of late canonical and noncanonical
texts that “retain” a council of gods in Israelite and Jewish theology. A fresh
perspective is needed. The article also argues that scholars need not be
driven to choose between a presumed evolution toward monotheism for
Israel’s religion, a rhetorical use of polytheism to promote monotheism,
and arguments that suggest the text cannot mean what it plainly says. In
an effort to address these issues and in anticipation of certain questions, it
is expedient to detail the weaknesses of what are hereafter referred to as
the “consensus view” and the “traditional approach.”
1. The Consensus View of Monotheistic Evolution: 
Overview and Evaluation
1.1. Psalm 82
It is not difﬁcult to demonstrate that the Hebrew Bible assumes and af-
ﬁrms the existence of other gods. The textbook passage is Psalm 82. Verse
one (excluding the superscription) of that Psalm reads:
:fPøv‘yi µyhIløa” br,q,B} laEAtd'[“B" bX:ni µyhIløa”
God stands in the divine council; in the midst of the gods he passes
judgment.
The ﬁrst µyhIløa” is clearly referring to a singular entity (God) due to subject-
verb agreement and other contextual clues. The second µyhIløa” is obviously
plural due to the preposition br,q,B}, because God cannot be said to be
standing in the midst of a (singular) god or Himself. The Trinity is ruled out
immediately as an explanation, because the plural gods over whom the

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
3
God of Israel presides are here being sentenced to die for their corrupt rule
of nations on the earth.
Psalm 82 is considered late in composition on several grounds.1 The
clear reference to a pantheon over which Yahweh presides must be ex-
plained, since by this time Israelite religion is assumed to have evolved into
an “intolerant monotheism.” As a result, many scholars consider Psalm 82
to be either a vestige of polytheism overlooked by monotheistic redactors,
or perhaps a deliberate rhetorical use of Israel’s polytheistic past to declare
the new outlook of monotheism.2 After the exile, so it is put forth, the gods
of the nations are relegated to the status of angels.
Both proposals fail on a number of levels.3 With respect to the ﬁrst op-
tion, it is evasive to appeal to inept redactors when one’s theory of a cam-
paign to stamp out polytheistic texts encounters a “problem passage,” es-
pecially when Psalm 82 is by no means the only text evincing divine
plurality and a divine council “missed” by scribes. There are explicit ref-
erences to gods and a divine council in Second Temple period Jewish lit-
erature. In the Qumran sectarian material alone, there are approximately
185 occurrences of µyhIløa”, µyhIløa”h:, µyhIløa” yneB}, µyhIløa”h: yneB}, µylIaE, µylIaE yneB} in
contexts where a divine council is mentioned with the same vocabulary
(hd;[E, d/s, lh:q:) utilized in texts of the Hebrew Bible for a divine assembly.4
In fact, it is apparent that some of these references allude to or draw on ca-
nonical material. If there was an alleged campaign to correct ancient texts
and their polytheistic views, the postexilic Jewish community either did
not get the message or ignored it. However, the presumptions of an evo-
lution from polytheism to monotheism and the incompatibility of mono-
theism with a council of lesser gods are so entrenched in critical scholar-
ship that scholars such as Carol Newsom in her work on the Qumran Songs
of the Sabbath Sacriﬁce coin oxymoronic terms like “angelic elim” to explain
the material.5 It is more coherent to abandon the evolutionary paradigm
and ask how it was that (1) late biblical authors had no qualms about an
assembly of gods under Yahweh; and (2) Second Temple Jews, willing to
suffer death rather than worship other gods, failed to consider divine coun-
cil texts in the Hebrew Bible as a threat to monotheism.
Concerning the second viewpoint, that polytheism is being used rhe-
torically in Psalm 82, much is made of the last verse in that psalm, where
1. See Marvin Tate, Psalms 51–100 (WBC 20; Dallas, TX: Word, 2002), xxv. Throughout this
article I use “Deutero-Isaiah” for convenience.
2. See, for example, Mark S. Smith, The Origins of Biblical Monotheism: Israel’s Polytheistic
Background and the Ugaritic Texts (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003); Simon B. Parker,
“The Beginning of the Reign of God—Psalm 82 as Myth and Liturgy,” Revue Biblique 102
(1995): 532–59.
3. Michael S. Heiser, “The Divine Council in Late Canonical and Non-Canonical Second
Temple Jewish Literature” (Ph.D. diss., University of Wisconsin–Madison, 2004).
4. Heiser, “The Divine Council,” 176–213.
5. Carol A. Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacriﬁce: A Critical Edition (HSM 27; Atlanta:
Scholars Press, 1985), 23–24.

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
4
God is asked to rise up and possess the nations (82:8). This is interpreted
as a new idea of the psalmist to encourage the exilic community—that, de-
spite exile, Yahweh will rise up and take the nations as his own having
sentenced the other gods to death. This view ignores preexilic texts such
as Psalm 24 and 29, long recognized as some of the most ancient material
in the canon.6 For example, Ps 29:1 contains plural imperatives directed at
the µylIaE yneB}, pointing to a divine council context. Verse 10 declares, 
“The Lord sits enthroned over the ﬂood; the Lord sits enthroned as
king forever.” In Israelite cosmology, the ﬂood upon which Yahweh
sat was situated over the solid dome that covered the round, ﬂat
earth. Since it cannot coherently be asserted that the author would as-
sert that Gentile nations were not under the dome and ﬂood, this
verse reﬂects the idea of world kingship. The Song of Moses, also
among the oldest poetry in the Hebrew Bible, echoes the thought. In
Exodus 15:18 the text reads, “The Lord will reign forever and ever.”
As F. M. Cross noted over thirty years ago, “The kingship of the gods
is a common theme in early Mesopotamian and Canaanite epics. The
common scholarly position that the concept of Yahweh as reigning or
king is a relatively late development in Israelite thought seems
untenable.” 7 
Both of these perspectives (redactional bungling or rhetorical bril-
liance) are used to explain the presence of afﬁrmations of other gods in
texts where they are “out of place,” texts of late redaction or composition.
The primary examples are Deuteronomy and Deutero-Isaiah.
1.2. Deuteronomy
The consensus view argues that Deuteronomy provides evidence of an
evolution of Israelite religion toward an exclusivistic monotheism. The ar-
gument is offered on the basis of passages that forcefully contend there are
“no other gods besides Yahweh.” This view seems coherent until one re-
alizes that these “denial phrases” occur in the same chapters of Deuter-
onomy that assume and afﬁrm the existence of other gods (Deuteronomy
4 and 32). In answer to the juxtaposition of polytheistic and monotheistic
material in these passages, scholars argue that this phenomenon indicates
either a rhetorical merging of polytheistic and monotheistic traditions or
blunders by the redactors when updating the older traditions to monothe-
ism. Since the evolutionary trajectory is assumed from the outset, an ei-
ther-or fallacy is set forth for discussion.
6. Some scholars date the poetry of this psalm between the 12th and 10th centuries b.c.e.
See F. M. Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic: Essays in the History of the Religion of Israel (Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1973), 90–93. See also David Noel Freedman, “Who is Like
Thee Among the Gods?” in Ancient Israelite Religion: Essays in Honor of Frank Moore Cross (ed.
Patrick D. Miller Jr., Paul D. Hanson, and S. Dean McBride; Philadelphia: Fortress, 1987), 317.
7. F. M. Cross and D. N. Freedman, Studies in Ancient Yahwistic Poetry (Missoula, MT:
Scholars Press, 1975), 45, n. 59. 

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
5
The ﬁrst issue before us is to determine whether the relevant phrases
in Deuteronomy 4 and 32 actually deny the existence of other gods. The
parade examples are Deut 4:35, 39, and 32:39.
Deut 4:35 “You were shown these things so that you might know that
the Lord, he is the God (µyhIløa”h:); besides him there is no other (d/[ ˆyaE
/Db"l}mI).”
Deut 4:39 “Know therefore this day, and lay it to your heart, that Yah-
weh, he is the God (µyhIløa”h:) in heaven above and on the earth beneath;
there is no other (d/[ ˆyaE).”
Deut 32:29 “See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god besides
me (ydiM:[I µyhIløa” ˆyaEw]); I kill and I make alive; I wound and I heal; and
there is none that can deliver out of my hand.”
With respect to Deut 4:35, 39, µyhIløa”h: aWh hwhy is a verbless clause with
the pronoun emphasizing the subject, but what does it mean that Yahweh
is µyhIløa”h:? Is this a denial of the existence of other gods? How can that be
reconciled with the presumption of other gods in these passages: Deut
4:10–20; 32:8–9?8 It is at least equally probable from a linguistic perspec-
tive that the phrase means that Yahweh is superior or incomparable.9 That
is, Yahweh is the God par excellence, as Deut 10:17 states: µk<yhEløa” hwhy yKI
µyhIløa”h: yhEløa” aWh (“for the Lord our God, he is the God of the gods”). If the
other gods to whom Yahweh is compared here do not exist in the mind of
the writer, where is the praise, and perhaps even the honesty, in the state-
ment? Other passages in the Torah, such as Exod 15:18, beg the same ques-
tion. When the author wrote “Lord, who is like you among the µyla?” did
he really mean, “Lord who is like you among the imaginary beings that
really aren’t there”? When the ﬁnal redactors, presumably zealous over
the new idea of monotheism, allowed Deut 10:17 and Exod 15:18 to stand,
did they simply err, or were they content to put polytheistic language into
the mouth of Moses? How does such language accomplish rhetorical per-
suasion if the audience does not believe that any other deities exist to
whom Yahweh may be compared?
But what about the second half of the statements of Deut 4:35, 39
(/Db"l}mI d/[ ˆyaE)? Must the phrasing be construed as a denial of the existence
of all other gods except Yahweh? There are several difﬁculties with this
understanding.
First, similar constructions are used in reference to Babylon and Moab
in Isa 47:8, 10 and Nineveh in Zeph 2:15. In Isa 47:8, 10 Babylon says to her-
self, d/[ ysIp}a"w] ynia“ (“I am, and there is none else besides me”). The claim is
not that she is the only city in the world but that she has no rival. Nineveh
8. Reading Deut 32:8–9 with LXX and Qumran material. See n. 15.
9. The same kind of situation is found in 1 Kgs 18:21, a passage considered part of the
Deuteronomistic history. Elijah challenges the crowd at Carmel, “If Yahweh is µyhIløa”h:, follow
him, but if Baal, then follow him.” Yahweh’s status as µyhIløa”h: need not mean that Baal does not
exist. It more likely means, “Yahweh is the unrivaled God (of Israel or in general).”

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
6
makes the identical claim in Zeph 2:15 (d/[ ysIp}a"w] ynia“). In these instances,
the constructions cannot constitute the denial of the existence of other
cities and nations. The point being made is very obviously the concept of
incomparability.
Second, /Db"l}mI and other related forms (/Db"l}, db"l}) need not mean
“alone” in some exclusive sense. That is, a single person in a group could
be highlighted or focused on. 1 Kgs 18:1–6 is an example. The passage
deals with the end of the three-year drought and famine during the ca-
reer of Elijah. After meeting with Elijah, Ahab calls Obadiah, the steward
of his house, and together they set on a course of action to ﬁnd grass in or-
der to save their remaining horses and mules. Verse 6a then reads: ba:j}a"
/Db"l} dj:a<AËr,d,B} Ël"h: Why;d]b"[øw] /Db"l} dj:a< Ër,d,B} Ël"h: (“Ahab went one way by
himself [/Db"l}], and Obadiah went another way by himself [/Db"l}]”). While
it may be possible to suggest that Obadiah literally went through the land
completely unaccompanied in his search, it is preposterous to say that the
king of Israel went completely alone to look for grass—without body-
guards or servants. The point is that /Db"l} (and by extension /Db"l}mI) need
not refer to complete isolation or solitary presence. Another example is Ps
51:4 [Hebrew, v. 6], which reads in part: ytIaf:j: ÚD]b"l} Úl} (“against you, you
alone, I have sinned”). God was not the only person against whom David
had sinned. He had sinned against his wife and certainly Uriah. This is
obviously heightened rhetoric designed to highlight the One who had
been primarily offended. It was God against whom David’s offense was
incomparable.10
Third, the negation of such excluding prepositions and adverbs need
not be construed as denials of existence. The construction can be some sort
of incomparability statement. As Nathan MacDonald noted in his recent
work, Deuteronomy and the Meaning of ‘Monotheism,’ the only consideration
of the negative particle ˆyaE followed by the adverb d/[ with or without the
subsequent excluding particle (db"L}mI, sp<a<) is that of Hans Rechenmacher.11
The ﬁrst part of Rechenmacher’s study was a linguistic analysis of Hebrew
verbless sentences with particles of negation. He concludes his analysis
with an examination of prepositions and adverbs with an excluding sense,
including those found in the verses from Deuteronomy and (Deutero-)
10. Among several possible examples, two will sufﬁce. In Eccl 7:29 Solomon states, “See,
this alone (db"l}) I found, that God made man upright, but they have sought out many schemes”
(ESV). Is that the only thought or conclusion Solomon ever drew in his life? In Judg 7:5 we read
(ESV), “So he brought the people down to the water. And the Lord said to Gideon, ‘Every one
who laps the water with his tongue, as a dog laps, you shall set by himself [db"l}]. Likewise, ev-
ery one who kneels down to drink.’” Are we to conclude that Gideon took all 300 men who
passed this test and isolated them from each other? It is more coherent to say they were set
aside as a group. The point would be that the group of 300 was set aside in comparison to the
rest of the soldiers.
11. Hans Rechenmacher, “Außer mir gibt es keinen Gott!” Eine sprach- und literaturwissen-
schaftliche Studie zur Ausschließlichkeitsformel (ATSAT 49; St. Ottilien: EOS Verlag, 1997).
spread is 12 points short

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
7
Isaiah under consideration.12 Rechenmacher argues that the examples in
Deuteronomy 4 point to exclusivistic monotheism, but he fails to explain
why the construction in these texts cannot be describing incomparability.
It seems he did not make this connection because of prior assumptions
about the evolution of Israelite religion brought to the data.
MacDonald points out several methodological problems with Rechen-
macher’s study that are beyond the scope of this article.13 For the present
purpose, it must be asked whether the negative particle ˆyaE + d/[ requires
non-existence (as opposed to incomparability) and whether similar com-
binations (d/[ sp<a<) offer the same semantic possibility. The question is
relevant for the purpose of establishing an overlap with the denial phrases
in Deuteronomy 32 and Deutero-Isaiah (see below).
Fourth, other verses in Deuteronomy 32 make it clear that the exis-
tence of other gods is assumed by the writer.14 Deut 32:8–9 and its explicit
parallel, Deut 4:19–20, have Yahweh placing the Gentile nations under the
authority of lesser divine beings:
Deut 32:8 When the Most High gave to the nations their inheritance,
when he divided mankind, he ﬁxed the borders of the peoples ac-
cording to the number of the sons of God [µyhlah ynb].15 9 But the
Lord’s portion is his people, Jacob his allotted heritage.
12. Ibid., 97–114, cited in Nathan MacDonald, Deuteronomy and the Meaning of ‘Monothe-
ism’ (FAT 2/1; Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2003), 82.
13. For instance, MacDonald notes that, “Rechenmacher assumes, without argument,
that d/[ is exchangeable for a preposition with excluding function and personal sufﬁx.” Mac-
Donald counters by observing that on two occasions (Deut 4:35; Isa 45:21), “d/[ ˆyaE occurs with
an excluding prepositional construction . . . and such an exchange would create a tautologous
expression.” Lastly, as McDonald and other scholars have noted, neither the usual temporal
sense of adverbial d/[ (“still, yet”) nor the conjunctive sense (“additionally, also, again”) ﬁt
Deut 4:35, 39 and 32:39. If one accepts the list provided in BDB for those texts where d/[ does
not have either of these meanings, one is left with seven occurrences of the adverb, all of which
occur in questions or answers to questions. MacDonald notes that “in each case, what is being
questioned is not the absolute existence of an object, but only if there is an object in a person’s
immediate domain. . . . In each of the questions what is being asked is whether the one being
questioned has an additional [item or] member besides the ones already taken into account”
(MacDonald, Deuteronomy, 83–84).
14. See the ensuing discussion for more on Deut 32:8–9.
15. Textual critics of the Hebrew Bible are unanimous in agreement that the Qumran
reading (in brackets) is superior to the Masoretic text in Deut 32:8, which reads laEr;c‘yi yneB}
(“sons of Israel”). See, for example, P. W. Skehan, “A Fragment of the ‘Song of Moses’ (Deut 32)
from Qumran,” BASOR 136 (1954) 12–15; idem, “Qumran and the Present State of Old Testa-
ment Text Studies: The Masoretic Text,” JBL 78 (1959): 21; Julie Duncan, “A Critical Edition of
Deuteronomy Manuscripts from Qumran, Cave IV. 4QDtb, 4QDte, 4QDth, 4QDtj, 4QDtb,
4QDtk, 4QDtl” (Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 1989); Emanuel Tov, Textual Criticism of the
Hebrew Bible (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1992), 269; Eugene Ulrich et al., eds., Qumran Cave 4.IX:
Deuteronomy to Kings (DJD XIV; Oxford: Clarendon, 1995), 75–79; Sanders, The Provenance of
Deuteronomy 32, 156; J. Tigay, Deuteronomy, The JPS Torah Commentary (Philadelphia: Jewish
Publication Society, 1996), 514–18.

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
8
Deut 4:19 Lest you lift up your eyes to heaven, and when you see the
sun and the moon and the stars, all the host of heaven, you be drawn
away and bow down to them and serve them, whom the Lord your
God has allotted to all the peoples under the whole heaven. 20 But the
Lord has taken you and brought you out of the iron furnace, out of
Egypt, to be a people of his own inheritance, as you are this day. 
Some scholars seek to argue that the “sons of God” and “host of heaven”
in the passages refer only to idols or astronomical bodies.16 This issue will
be discussed in more detail below in another section of this article. At this
juncture, attention need only be drawn to Deut 32:17, a text that, alluding
to the failures of Israel in disobeying the warnings of Deut 4:19–20,17 quite
clearly has Moses referring to the other µyhIløa” as evil spiritual entities
(µydv): “They [Israel] sacriﬁced to demons (µydiV´l") who are not God (H'løa”),18
to gods (µyhIløa”) they did not know; new ones that had come along recently,
whom your fathers had not reverenced.” 
While these lesser µyhIløa” are linked to the statues that represented
them in the mind of their worshippers (Deut 4:28; 7:25; 28:64), these beings
must be considered real spiritual entities. Indeed, it cannot be presumed
that ancient people considered a humanly fabricated statue or fetish object
to be identical with the god in whose likeness it was fashioned. As one
scholar of ancient cult objects notes:
When a non-physical being manifested in a statue, this anchored the
being in a controlled location where living human beings could in-
teract with it through ritual performance. . . . In order for human be-
ings to interact with deities and to persuade them to create, renew,
and maintain the universe, these beings had to be brought down to
earth. . . . This interaction had to be strictly controlled in order to
avoid both the potential dangers of unrestricted divine power and the
pollution of the divine by the impurity of the human world. While the
ability of deities to act in the visible, human realm was brought about
through their manifestation in a physical body, manifestation in one
body did not in any sense restrict a deity, for the non-corporeal es-
sence of a deity was unlimited by time and space, and could manifest
in all its “bodies,” in all locations, all at one time.19
16. See below for “star language” in Deutero-Isaiah and a refutation of the approach that
this language refers only to inanimate astronomical bodies.
17. For example, Deut 17:3; 29:25–26; 30:17; 31:16; 32:16.
18. Note that H'løa” is singular, and so the translation “. . . who are not gods” is inaccurate.
Such a translation is also awkward in light of the following plural µyhIløa”. Arguing that the
µyhla were merely idols creates contradictions with other portions of Deuteronomy and the
Hebrew Bible. See the ensuing discussion.
19. Gay Robins, “Cult Statues in Ancient Egypt,” in Cult Image and Divine Representation
in the Ancient Near East (ASOR Book Series 10; ed. Neal H. Walls; Boston: American Schools of
Oriental Research, 2005), 1–2.

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
9
To reject the reality of these entities in the Israelite worldview is to cast the
canonical writer as someone who did not believe in the reality of demons,
a position out of step with other canonical authors.
In addition to vv. 8–9 and 17, another portion of Deuteronomy 32 as-
sumes the reality of other gods. Deut 32:43 is well known to textual critics,
since the text-critical data make it abundantly clear that this verse was al-
tered from its original form for theological reasons.20 A comparison of the
MT with 4QDeutq demonstrates this (see table, p. 10). It is signiﬁcant that
MT lacks the second line, an explicit reference to divine beings (µyhIløa”), in
what should be the ﬁrst bicolon. MT also changes µyim"v… to µyi/G. This alter-
ation seems odd, but the motive becomes clear if µyim"v… is understood not
as “heavens” but as “heavenly beings,” a meaning found elsewhere in the
Hebrew Bible.21 This pairing was apparently deliberately eliminated to
avoid the reference to other “divine beings.”22 The canonical author de-
mands the other gods, evil spiritual entities hostile to Israel, to bow before
the incomparable Yahweh.23
20. Most, if not all, scholars hold that these changes came in the Hellenistic period. This
conclusion is guided not by actual data but by the assumption that Israelite religion was
steadily evolving toward an exclusivistic monotheism that rejected the existence of other gods
after the exile. As this article details, this assumption has signiﬁcant ﬂaws. In terms of textual
data, all that is known for sure is that the Qumran material, the oldest witness to this passage,
contained references to other gods, whereas the later text of MT does not. The data says noth-
ing about when the alteration of MT took place. In view of the abundant canonical and non-
canonical postexilic and Hellenistic Jewish material in which the existence of other gods is as-
sumed, it is far more coherent to postulate that these textual changes came much later during
the period of textual “standardization” circa 100 c.e. One cannot argue that Hellenistic Juda-
ism in particular considered such “demythologizing” a theological duty, for the LXX is often
quite literal in passages where other gods are afﬁrmed (e.g., Ps 82:1 [LXX 81:1]; 89:7 [LXX
88:7]). This means that the fact that certain LXX passages do soften language that points to
other gods (see the next footnote) indicates only that some Jews felt uncomfortable with divine
plurality, not that Judaism as a whole could not process such language in the context of the
uniqueness of Yahweh. The abundant testimony to divine plurality in a divine council in the
Qumran material (Heiser, “The Divine Council,” 176–213) informs us that even the most con-
servative sects of Judaism in the ﬁrst century might not object to the language of divine plu-
rality. The Masoretic text rose to prominence only after centuries of textual diversity and not
by “intrinsic factors related to the textual transmission, but by political and socioreligious
events and developments” (Emanuel Tov, “Textual Criticism [OT],” in Anchor Bible Dictionary
[ed. D. N. Freedman; New York: Doubleday, 1992], 6:407). The social and religious pressures
that led to textual standardization in the ﬁrst century c.e. are a much better milieu for these
textual changes, and so the theological motivation behind them does not undermine the thesis
of this article, it strengthens it.
21. The parallelism in both Job 15:15 and Jer 14:22 supports this translation. See also Al-
exander Rofé, “The End of the Song of Moses (Deuteronomy 32:43),” in Deuteronomy: Issues and
Interpretation (ed. Alexander Rofé; New York: Continuum / T. & T. Clark, 2002), 50.
22. Arie van der Kooij, “The Ending of the Song of Moses: On the Pre-Masoretic Version
of Deut 32:43,” in Studies in Deuteronomy in Honor of C. J. Labuschagne on the Occasion of his 65th
Birthday (ed. F. García Martínez, A. Hilhorst, J. T. A. G. M. van Ruiten, and A. S. van der Woude;
VTSup; Leiden: Brill, 1994), 93. See also the comments of Tigay (Deuteronomy, 516).
23. The notion that this language is merely poetic—as though the use of poetry means the
writer did not believe something expressed in poetry—is addressed brieﬂy in the subsequent

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
10
The denial phrases in Deuteronomy 4 and 32 must therefore be con-
textualized in light of the canonical book as a whole. The primary phrases
of concern are ydiM:[I µyhIløa” ˆyaEw] and aWh ynia“ ynia“. With respect to the former,
in an Ugaritic text with parallel language Baal says: ªa˙dy d ymlk ºl ªilm (“I
alone am the one who can be king over the gods”).24 This is certainly no
statement for exclusivistic monotheism at Ugarit! The phrase points to in-
comparability—only Baal among all the other gods of the Ugaritic pan-
theon was El’s co-regent. More will be said about this phrase in the ensuing
discussion of Deutero-Isaiah.
With respect to ynia“ aWh ynia“ in Deut 32:39, the most thorough work is
that of C. H. Williams.25 This study concluded that these are not state-
ments of sole self-existence or divine interchangeability (“I am the same”).
MT
4QDeutq a
wm[ µywg wnynrh
wm[ µymv wnynrh
O nations, acclaim His people!
Rejoice, O heavenly ones,b with 
Him!
µyhla lx wl wwjtvhw
Bow down, all you gods, before 
Him!
µwqy wydb[Aµd yk
µwqy wynb µd yk
For he will avenge the blood of 
his servants;
For he will avenge the blood of 
his sons;
wyrxl byvy µqnw
wyrxl byvy µqnw
He will exact vengeance on his 
adversaries,
He will exact vengeance on his 
adversaries.
µlvy wyancmlw
He will repay those who hate 
him,
wm[ wtmda rpkw
wm[ tmda rpkyw
And make atonement for his land 
(and) his people.
And make atonement for his 
people’s land.
a. For the published text of 4QDeutq, see P. W. Skehan, “A Fragment of the ‘Song of Moses’
(Deut. 32) from Qumran,” BASOR 136 (1954) 12–15; Eugene Ulrich, Frank Moore Cross and
Sidnie White Crawford, eds., Qumran Cave 4/IX: Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Kings (DJD 14;
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), 137–42, pl. 31. LXX agrees with 4QDeutq but adds yet
another bicolon to the ﬁrst as a secondary, explanatory gloss that softens the divine vocabulary
by inserting angels into the parallelism (Tigay, Deuteronomy, 516–17).
b. See the discussion for this translation.
24. KTU 1.4.vii.49–52.
25. C. H. Williams, I Am He: The Interpretation of ªAni Huª in Jewish and Early Christian Lit-
erature (WUNT 2/113; Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2000), 39–52.
discussion. For now it is sufﬁcient to note that having the canonical writer claim Yahweh is su-
perior to beings that the writer didn’t believe existed would be vacuous praise.

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
11
As such, ynia“ aWh ynia“ cannot be construed as an expression that inherently
denies the existence of other deities. Sanders adds, “On the basis of this co-
lon alone it is difﬁcult to decide if it is a claim for the absoluteness of Yah-
weh (i.e., the existence of other gods is denied), or the incomparability of
Yahweh.”26 The solution seems to lie in balancing the colon ydiM:[I µyhIløa” ˆyaEw]
(“there is no god besides me”) with the phrase lyXIm" ydiY;mI ˆyaEw] (“there is none
that can deliver out of my hand”). Hence a comparison is again being
made: Yahweh’s ability versus the ability of opposing gods. Sanders says
elsewhere:
How do we translate ydm[? Theoretically ‘with’, ‘beside’, and ‘like’ are
our options. In other parts of the song the existence of other gods is
not denied but they are regarded as powerless; cf. v. 31, 37–38, 43a
(4QDtq). This circumstance seems to render the translation ‘with’ less
convincing. It is the incomparability [of God] . . . that is confessed
here. The phrase ydiM:[I µyhIløa” ˆyaEw] must have virtually the same mean-
ing as the far more common expression of YHWH’s incomparability
by the phrase . . . k ˆya. The possibility of translating µ[ by ‘like’ is also
suggested by some Ugaritic evidence. . . . In KTU 1.6:i.44–45 Ilu and
Athiratu are comparing various candidates for Baºalu’s succession.
Ilu rejects one of them, stating: dq ªanm l yr˛ ºm bºl l yºdb mr˙ ºm bn dgn
ktmsm (“One of feeble strength cannot run like Baºalu, one who
knuckles down cannot poise the lance like the son of Daganu”; lines
50–52). Since at this moment Baºalu is not among the living anymore,
the translation ‘with’ is obviously unacceptable here. It has long been
perceived that ‘like’ is the preferable translation.27
The point above regarding the relationship between Yahweh’s incompara-
bility and his uniqueness is an important one. The fact that there is no deity
who can save those whom Yahweh has targeted for judgment speaks to
both aspects. This uniqueness in turn compels the confession that Yahweh
alone is the “true” God (Jer 10:10). This is the heart of Israel’s theology. 
As one scholar recently noted in a work on the question of monothe-
ism in Deuteronomy:
[T]he belief in one God is the central issue in the theology of Deuter-
onomy. In later times, the monotheistic statements of Deuteronomy
(esp. 4:35, 39; 6:4; 7:9; 32:39) are used by the monotheistic religions of
Late Antiquity, Judaism and Christianity, to support their argument
against those who did not believe in one God. . . . As far as the belief
in one God is concerned, Deuteronomy is not concerned with a theo-
retical monotheism, but rather gives a confession of faith. The mono-
theism of Deuteronomy emerged from the struggle against idolatry.
Moreover, the decline of Israel is attributed to the following of other
26. Paul Sanders, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32 (Leiden: Brill, 1996), 226.
27. Ibid., 238; cf. n. 788 (emphasis mine). On the Ugaritic evidence, see also Johannes C. de
Moor, The Seasonal Pattern in the Ugaritic Myth of Baºlu According to the Version of Ilimilku (AOAT
16; Kevelaer: Butzon & Bercker / Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener Verlag, 1971), 203.

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
12
gods. The existence of other gods is not denied, however, only their power
and signiﬁcance for Israel.28
If one sees a link between the composition of Deuteronomy and the Deu-
teronomistic History, the case for understanding these kinds of phrases in
terms of incomparability rather than denial of existence becomes even
stronger. The absence of any unmistakable denial of the existence of other
gods in Deuteronomy and the Dtr literature is bolstered by a study of the
concept of alien deities in that material by Yair Hoffman.29 Hoffman stud-
ied the occurrence and distribution of rkn µyhwla, rz la, and µyrja µyhwla to
discern whether Israel’s faith reﬂected a monotheism that denied the ex-
istence of other gods, or if such phrases denoted only a difference in per-
spective (“they are other gods since they are not ours”).30 Based on the
infrequent number of occurrences and their distribution, Hoffman con-
cluded the ﬁrst two phrases could not decisively answer the question. The
third phrase, the most relevant to the study, resulted in more clarity. By
way of summation, Hoffman found:
The qualifying phrase t[dy al rva veriﬁes that by the phrase µyhwla
µyrja Dtr did not intend a conclusive denial of deities other than
Yahweh. . . . I suggest that the creation of the expression µyrja µyhwla
reﬂects Dtr’s vague feeling that a term was needed which could ex-
press the dichotomy, though not absolute contradistinction, between
Yahweh and all other gods. . . . The creation of a term was vital for the
Dtr who wanted to contrast other deities with Yahweh not on the
level of existence, but on the level of potency. . . . Thus the concept of
“other gods” expressed by the term µyrja µyhwla is that they exist,
they may even be “helpful” for their natural worshippers, but not for
Israel, which can be helped only by Yahweh. Such a concept of other
gods leads indirectly to the belief that Yahweh is mightier than the
other gods, and therefore it is not only immoral but stupid for Israel
to transgress his covenant. The concept of the sovereignty of Yahweh
over all deities, though not his exclusiveness, and the idea that it is le-
gitimate for each nation to worship its own gods, are well attested in
Deut 4:19–20. Here Israel is warned not to worship the sun, the moon,
and the stars, “whom the Lord has allotted (qlj) unto all nations un-
der the whole world.31
To summarize, the confessional statements of Deut 4:35, 39 and 32:12,
39 must be viewed against the backdrop of the Most High’s dealings with
28. J. T. A. G. M. van Ruiten, “The Use of Deuteronomy 32:39 in Monotheistic Controver-
sies in Rabbinic Literature,” in Studies in Deuteronomy in Honor of C. J. Labuschagne on the Oc-
casion of his 65th Birthday (ed. F. García Martínez et al.; Leiden: Brill, 1994), 223 (emphasis mine).
29. Yair Hoffman, “The Concept of ‘Other Gods’ in Deuteronomistic Literature,” in Politics
and Theopolitics in the Bible and Postbiblical Literature (ed. Henning Graf Reventlow, Yair Hoff-
man, and Benjamin Uffenheimer; JSOTSup 171; Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press, 1994), 66–84.
30. Ibid., 71. Emphasis is the author’s.
31. Ibid., 71–72.

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
13
the Gentile nations and the gods he appointed to govern them. It would be
nonsensical to conclude that Deut 4:19–20 and 32:8–9 show Yahweh giving
the nations up to the governance of non-existent beings. The writer is not
suggesting in turn that Yahweh allotted non-existent beings to the nations
so as to explain why the nations outside Israel worship non-existent be-
ings. The implication is that the declarations of Deut 4:35, 39 and 32:12, 39
are best understood as reﬂecting a worldview that accepted the reality of
other gods, along with Yahweh’s utter uniqueness among them, not a
worldview that denied the existence of lesser µyhIløa”. The same picture
emerges in Deutero-Isaiah.
1.3. Deutero-Isaiah
Nearly ﬁfty years ago, James Barr noted that in no case did Deuteronomy
deny the existence of other deities. Barr suggested that, in view of the use
of identical phrasings, the same could be said for (Deutero-) Isaiah:
It may also be asked whether the question of mere existence [of other
gods] is as important as has been commonly held for those later texts
such as Deutero-Isaiah which are supposed to maintain the fullest
type of monotheism. When we read in Psalm 14:1 that the fool has
said in his heart µyhIløa” ˆyaE, we are commonly agreed that the foolish
man is no absolute atheist asserting the non-existence of God; he is
denying his signiﬁcance, refusing to reckon with God. Is it not pos-
sible to understand in much the same way those places where Deu-
tero-Isaiah uses the same negative particle?”32
Deutero-Isaiah is consistent with Deuteronomy since the phrases in
his work on which scholars depend for arguing other gods do not exist, are
the same, or are similar to those just discussed in Deuteronomy 4 and 32.
There is also solid evidence that Isaiah utilizes the worldview of Deuter-
onomy 4 and 32, as well as Psalm 82. If so, then his alleged denials of the
existence of other gods must be contextualized by his broader theology.
To begin, scholars of the book of Isaiah have long recognized the pres-
ence of the divine council in the book of Isaiah, particularly Isa 40:1–8:33
32. James Barr, The Problem of Israelite Monotheism (TGUOS 17; Glasgow: Glasgow Uni-
versity, 1957–1958), 53–54.
33. See, for example, H. H. Rowley, “The Council of Yahweh,” JTS 45 (1944): 151–57;
Kingsbury, “Prophets and the Council of Yahweh,” 279–86; Polley, “Hebrew Prophecy Within
the Council of Yahweh,” 141–56; Christopher R. Seitz, “The Divine Council: Temporal Transi-
tion and New Prophecy in the Book of Isaiah,” JBL 109:2 (1990): 229–47; Frank Moore Cross,
“The Council of Yahweh in Deutero-Isaiah,” JNES 12 (1953): 274–77; Martti Nissinen, “Prophets
in the Divine Council,” 4–19. Two features of Isa 40:1–8 demonstrate the presence of the divine
council. First, there are several plural imperatives in vv. 1 (Wmj“n' Wmj“n'; “console”), 2 (War]qIw] . . .  WrB}D';
“speak . . . and call”), and 3 (WrV‘y' . . . WNP"; “prepare . . . make straight”) as well as plural sufﬁxes
(v. 1, µk<yhEløa” [note the masculine 2pl], “your God”; v. 3, WnyhEløalE, “for our God”). The commands
are issued to an unseen audience and require actions that cannot be fulﬁlled by earthly ad-
dressees. Seitz and others have pointed out that interpreting yMI[" as a vocative is ruled out by
the parallel µil"v…Wry] blEAl[", which is clearly the intended object and not a vocative. See especially

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
14
Scholars have also taken note of the familiar mythological motifs in the
book associated with Yahweh’s assembly—the same sort of “star” language
referring to divine beings noted in the discussion of Deuteronomy 4 and
32. For example, consider Isa 40:22–26:
22 (It is) he that sits / is enthroned upon the circle of the earth, and
its inhabitants (are) as grasshoppers; he stretches out the heavens as
a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent in which to dwell. 23 He
brings princes to naught; the rulers of this world he makes as nothing.
24 No sooner are they planted, no sooner are they sown, no sooner do
they take root in the ground, than he blows on them and they wither,
and a whirlwind sweeps them away like chaff. 25 “To whom will you
compare me? Or who is my equal?” says the Holy One. 26 Lift up
your eyes to the heights and see: who created these? He who brings
out their host by number, calling them all by name; by the greatness
of his might, and because he is strong in power not one is missing.
This passage is intriguing on several levels. The reference to the “circle of
the earth” (v. 22; ≈r,a:h: gWj) and “stretching out (hf</Nh") the heavens as a tent
(lh<aøK:) in which to dwell” (v. 22) are overt references to the mythological
dwelling of El.34 Likewise, the imperative to lift up the eyes “to the heights”
(µ/rm:) in context with these references speaks of the dwelling of El, the
place where the old council gods meet with the high God.
The wording of Isa 40:23 is of special interest: “He brings princes to
naught; the rulers of this world he makes as nothing.” The word for
“princes” here is not the familiar and expected µyric…, but µyniz]/r, a word that
is certainly within the semantic range of royal sons.35 This becomes note-
worthy once it is recalled that in Ugaritic religion divine royal sons bore the
34. Habel notes, “The heights of that horizon [˙ûg] are the cosmic North, the traditional
mythological abode of the gods” (Norman C. Habel, “He Who Stretches Out the Heavens,”
CBQ 34:4 [1972]: 417–18). See also Luis I. J. Stadelmann, The Hebrew Conception of the World: A
Philological and Literary Study (AnBib 39; Rome: Pontiﬁcal Institute, 1970), 42–43, 126; E. The-
odore Mullen, The Divine Council in Canaanite and Early Hebrew Literature (HSM 24; Missoula,
MT: Scholars Press, 1980), 195–98; F. M. Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic, 36; Marjo C. A.
Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds: Ugaritic and Hebrew Descriptions of the Divine (Münster: Ugarit-Ver-
lag, 1990), 376–82.
35. The word µyniz]/r is a Qal masculine plural participle from ˆzr. The verb occurs else-
where for royalty in Judg 5:3; Ps 2:2; Prov 8:15; 31:4; Hab 1:10.
hL:sIm} hb:r;[“B: WrV‘y' and the ensuing description of this activity in vv. 4–5. Second, there is alter-
nation of speakers in vv. 1–6. The speaker who issues the plural imperatives of vv. 1–2 is pre-
sumably Yahweh (addressing his divine court), due to the fact that he refers to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem as “my people” and pronounces the sins of those people as having been pardoned.
The speaker changes in v. 3, where a voice from the assembly who has just heard the instruc-
tion of Yahweh calls out (to plural addressees again) to make preparation for the arrival of
Yahweh and his glory (v. 5). This heavenly voice then addresses another personage with a sin-
gular imperative (v. 6a, . . . ar;q} rmEaø l/q; “a voice said, ‘call . . .’”). The text-critical issue in Isa
6:8, which involves a difference in grammatical person of the verb, affects only the potential
identiﬁcation of the herald, not the plurality of the audience in the scene (see Seitz, “Divine
Council,” 238–46).

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
15
title tp†,36 the philological equivalent to fpv, the same term used in Psalm
82 for the gods who were judging (lw,[:AWfP}v‘TI yt"m:Ad[") the nations unjustly
(cf. Deut 4:19–20 and 32:8–9).
To deny that Deutero-Isaiah has the same “starry” sons of God in view
here, one has to argue that the prophet is referring exclusively to literal as-
tronomical bodies. This assertion is difﬁcult to defend, since the result of
that choice is that Isaiah is describing how God commands chunks of rock
and balls of gas, which somehow affect events on earth—speciﬁcally the
corrupt judgment of Psalm 82. To say the least, this smacks of modern as-
trology. It is much more coherent to have Isaiah accepting the worldview
of Psalm 82 as including a council lesser µyhIløa” who can in no way compare
to Yahweh.
As in the case of Deuteronomy, it also cannot be argued that Deutero-
Isaiah uses this star language with reference only to humanly fabricated
idols that might depict astral deities. The star language of Isaiah 40 pro-
vides no hint that the writer was speaking of manufactured physical ob-
jects. Moreover, elsewhere Deutero-Isaiah informs us that the object and
the deity were not identical. The statement in Isa 46:1 that “Bel bows down;
Nebo stoops; their idols are on beasts and livestock” suggests a distinction
between the two. Bel and Nebo are powerless to avoid “their images” be-
ing carried off into captivity. As with all the passages heretofore consid-
ered, the writer’s point in Isaiah 46 is Yahweh’s incomparability (46:5), not
the non-existence of the other gods. Unlike Bel and Nebo, whose images
can be carried off, Yahweh, who has no image, has carried the nation of Is-
rael since its birth, and will carry them out of Babylon (46:1–4).
It is against this backdrop and the larger scope of Deuteronomy that
Isaiah’s “none besides me” statements must be understood. Failure to do so
leaves one with inner-biblical and logical contradictions. There are three
primary passages to which scholars appeal to assert Isaiah denied the ex-
istence of other gods:
Isa 43:10–12
10 “You are my witnesses,” declares Yahweh, “and my
servant whom I have chosen, that you may know and believe me, and
understand that I am He (aWh ynia“). Before me no god was formed
(rx"/nAalø yn'p:l}), neither shall there be after me. 11 I, I am Yahweh, and
besides me there is no savior (['yv¥/m ydi[:l}B"mI ˆyaEw]). 12 I declared and
saved and I proclaimed, when there was no strange (god) among you:
and you are my witnesses,” says Yahweh, “that I am God.” 
Isa 44:6–8
6 Thus says Yahweh the King of Israel, and its Redeemer,
Yahweh who creates the hosts: “I am the ﬁrst, and I am the last; and
besides me there is no god (µyhIløa” ˆyaE yd'[:l}B"mIW). 7 Who is like me? Let
36. Lowell K. Handy, Among the Host of Heaven: The Syro-Palestinian Pantheon as Bureau-
cracy (Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns, 1994), 113; Cyrus H. Gordon, “tp†,” Ugaritic Textbook:
Glossary, Indices (revised reprint; AnOr 38; Rome: Pontiﬁcal Biblical Institute, 1998), 505–6;
Nicholas Wyatt, “Titles of the Ugaritic Storm God,” UF 24 (1992): 422. Wyatt in particular notes
that tp† may be taken as referring to “ruling” (mlk).

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
16
him proclaim it, let him declare and set it forth before me. Who has
announced from of old the things that are coming? Let them tell me
what is yet to be. 8 Fear not, neither be afraid; have I not told you from
of old and declared it? And you are my witnesses. Is there a god be-
sides me (ydi[:l}B"mI H'/la” vyeh“)? There is no Rock; I know not any.” 
Isa 45:5–7, 14, 18, 21–22
5 “I am Yahweh, and there is no other (ˆyaEw]
d/[), besides me there is no God (µyhIløa” ˆyaE ytIl:Wz): I gird you, though
you do not know me, 6 that men may know, from the rising of the sun
and from the west, that there is none besides me; I am Yahweh, and
there is no other (d/[ ˆyaEw]). 7 I form the light and create darkness; I
make prosperity and create calamity: I Yahweh do all these things.”
14 Thus says Yahweh: “The wealth of Egypt, and merchandise of
Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over to you
and be yours; they shall follow you; in chains they shall come over
and fall down before you; they shall make supplication to you, say-
ing, ‘God is with you only, and there is no other, there is no god be-
sides him’ (µyhIløa” sp<a< d/[ ˆyaEw]).” 18 For thus says Yahweh, who created
the heavens—he is God—who formed the earth and made it; he hath
established it; he did not create it a chaos; he formed it to be inhab-
ited. “I am Yahweh; and there is no other (d/[ ˆyaEw]).” 21 Declare and
present your case; let them take counsel together! Who told this long
ago? Who declared it of old? Was it not I, Yahweh? And there is no
other god besides me; a just God and a Savior; there is none besides
me (ytIl:Wz ˆyia"). 22 Turn to me and be saved, all the ends of the earth!
For I am God, and there is no other (d/[ ˆyaEw]).
The following eleven “denial phrases” can be drawn from the above
passages in Isaiah—phrases that are either identical or nearly identical to
those found in Deut 4:35, 39 and 32:12, 39:
['yv¥/m ydi[:l}B"mI ˆyaEw] (1)1
µyhIløa” ˆyaE yd'[:l}B"mIW (2)1
:yTI[}d;y;AlB" rWx ˆyaEw] yd'[:l}B"mI H'/la” vyeh“ (3)1
yd'[:l}B"mI µyhIløa” d/[AˆyaEw] (4)1
µyhIløa” ˆyaE ytIl:Wz (5)1
:ytIl:Wz ˆyia" (6)1
d/[ ˆyaEw] (7)1
µyhIløa” sp<a< d/[ ˆyaEw] (8)1
yd;[:l}BI sp<a<AyKI (9)1
rz; µk<B: ˆyaEw] (10)
laE rx"/nAalø yn'p:l} (11)
The ﬁrst observation is that the prepositions (yd[lb [m], ytlwz), the adverb
spa, and the adverbial phrase dw[ ˆyaw in the above list are interchangeable.
In Isa 45:6, yd[lbm is juxtaposed with both spa and dw[ ˆya. In like manner,
Isa 45:21 has yd[lbm in tandem with ytlwz and dw[ ˆya. These interchanges
allow an important methodological consideration. In some cases the con-

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
17
struction containing an excluding preposition or the adverbial phrase
found in Deut 4:35, 39 and 32:12, 39 is identical to those occurring in denial
phrases in Isaiah. On other occasions, a semantically congruent preposi-
tion or adverb is used by the author. In order for one to argue that the de-
nial phrases indicate one thing in Deuteronomy (other gods are real but
are not Yahweh) and another in Isaiah (other gods do not exist at all), one
would have to produce distinctive prepositions or adverbs in these syn-
tactical structures or different “negative particle plus excluding preposi-
tion or adverb” constructions. This is not where the data leads.
Phrases 1 through 4 in our listing each have the negative particle ˆya
and the preposition ydlbm in common (save for number 3, where vyeh“ forms
a rhetorical question with an expected negative answer instead of ˆya).
Deut 4:35 utilizes this same combination (/db"l}mI d/[ ˆyaE; “there is none be-
sides him”). Deut 32:39 echoes the same thought, albeit with a different
preposition (ydiM:[I µyhIløa” ˆyaE; “there is no God besides me”). In view of the
earlier discussion that the wording of Deut 4:35, 39 and Deut 32:39 does
not equate to a denial of the existence of other gods, on what grounds must
we conclude that the same language in Isaiah means there are no gods?
Phrases 5 and 6 represent Isa 45:5, 21, and point to the use of the
preposition ytlwz to describe Yahweh’s relationship to other gods (ˆyaE ytIl:Wz
µyhIløa”; “besides me there is no god” and ytIl:Wz ˆyia"; “there is none [no god]
besides me”). Isa 45:21 transparently correlates this phrase with the use of
yd[lbm in tandem with dw[ ˆya, the same combination as in Deut 4:35. This
interchange elicits the conclusion that the negative particle with excluding
ytlwz does not intend to tell the reader that no other gods exist, only that
Yahweh is unique.
Moving on, the phrase dw[ ˆya also occurs in numbers 7 and 8 in our
list, thereby aligning those references with the incomparability statements
of Deut 4:35, 39. In addition to what has already been said about this cor-
relation, it should also be noted that in Isa 46:9 dw[ ˆya occurs in parallel
with ˆya followed by the comparative preposition k, which implicitly al-
lows for the existence of other gods. The terms in the ninth phrase in our
list, yd;[:l}BI sp<a<AyKI, have already been seen to overlap with terms in Deu-
teronomy. As a result, phrases 7 through 9 in our list are not evidence that
Isaiah denies the existence of other gods.
Phrase number 10 comes from Isa 43:12 and reads rz; µk<B: ˆyaEw] (“and
among you there were no strange (gods)”). The distinct feature here is the
word rz; coupled with the particle of negation, ˆyaE. This combination is
found in Deut 32:12, which is presupposed in Deut 31:29.37 Due to its cor-
relation with Deut 32:39 and Deut 4:35, 39, it cannot be argued that Deut
32:12 conveys the idea of exclusivistic monotheism. The syntactical over-
laps once again compel us to rule out the tenth phrase.
This leaves only phrase number 11: laE rx"/nAalø yn'p:l}. It is a claim of
Yahweh’s pre-existence with respect to all other gods; hence Yahweh is
37. Sanders, Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 394.

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
18
incomparable among the gods. Yahweh, the One who created all the mem-
bers of the heavenly host (cf. Neh 9:6; Isa 40:26; Ps 33:6), is ontologically
pre-eminent. The phrase does not deny that Yahweh created other gods.
There is no other god who can claim either creative power or chronological
priority, and there will never be another like him.
Finally, Hebrew syntax aside, if one reads the denial statements in
Deutero-Isaiah it is not difﬁcult to discern upon what basis the denial lan-
guage occurs. Is the language concerned with making the point that Yah-
weh is the only god who exists, or is the text intending something else? In
Isa 43:10–12, it is Yahweh’s claim to be alone in his pre-existence, his ability
to save, and his national deliverance. In Isa 44:6–8 the focus is on certain at-
tributes of Yahweh. In the texts from Isaiah 45, there are very obvious com-
parisons between Yahweh’s deeds, justice, salvation, and deliverance of his
children and the impotence of the other gods. All these passages are trans-
parently concerned with comparing Yahweh to other gods—not comparing
Yahweh to beings that do not exist; that would be empty praise indeed.
2. Traditional Concerns with Divine Plurality 
in Israelite Religion
Traditional approaches to afﬁrmations of divine plurality in the Hebrew
Bible are understandably motivated by theological concerns, most notably
a perceived compromise of monotheism. The problem is one of language
and its assumptions. On one hand, it is assumed that the modern person’s
deﬁnition of “monotheism” can rightly be imposed on the ancient Israelite
mind. On the other hand, it is also assumed that any disconnect between
the modern notion of “monotheism” and the theology of the ancient faith-
ful Israelite can accurately be labeled with modern terms like “polythe-
ism” or “henotheism.”
2.1 Psalm 82: Gods or Men?
With these assumptions ﬁrmly in place, traditional objections to divine
plurality usually take the form of appeals to the denial statements dis-
cussed above, casting the plural µyhIløa” of certain passages as human be-
ings, or asserting that the other µyhIløa” are only idols. It is convenient to
return to several verses in Psalm 82:
:fPøv‘yi µyhIløa” br,q,B} laEAtd'[“B" bX:ni µyhIløa” πs:a:l} r/mz}mI 1
God stands in the divine council; in the midst of the gods he passes
judgment.
:µk<L}KU ˆ/yl}[< yneb}W µT<a" µyhIløa” yTIr]m"a:Aynia“ 6
:WlPøTI µyric…h" dj"a"k}W ˆWtWmT} µd;a:K} ˆkEa: 7
6 “I said, ‘you are gods, sons of the Most High, all of you’. 7 Therefore
you shall die as humans do, and you shall fall as one of the princes.

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
19
In verse six, the plural µyhIløa” of 82:1 are referred to once again as µyhIløa” but
are further identiﬁed as sons of the God of Israel (the Most High). It is well
known that the phrases µyhIløa” yneB}, µyhIløa”h: yneB}, and µylIaE yneB} have certiﬁable
linguistic counterparts in Ugaritic texts to a council of gods under El, and
that the meaning of these phrases in the Hebrew Bible points to divine be-
ings.38 Traditional Christian and Jewish scholars have commonly argued
that similar phrases, such as references to Moses as µyhIløa” (Exod 4:16; 7:1),
Israel as Yahweh’s “son” (Exod 4:23; Hos 11:1), and Israelites as “sons of the
living God” (Hos 1:10 [Hebrew, 2:1]) inform us that the µyhIløa” of Psalm 82
are human rulers, namely, the elders of Israel.
As a number of other scholars have pointed out, this position is inco-
herent for several reasons. First, if the µyhIløa” in Psalm 82 are humans, why
are they sentenced to die “like humans”? This sounds as awkward as sen-
tencing a child to grow up, or a dog to bark. The point of v. 6 is that, in re-
sponse to their corruption, the µyhIløa” will be stripped of their immortality
at God’s discretion and die as humans die. A clear contrast is intended by
both the grammar and structure of the Hebrew text, saving us from such
logic.39 Second, what is the scriptural basis for the idea that this psalm has
God presiding over a council of humans that governs the nations of the
earth? At no time in the Hebrew Bible did Israel’s elders ever have juris-
diction over all the nations of the earth. In fact, other divine council texts
such as Deut 32:8–9 have the situation exactly opposite—Israel was sepa-
rated from the nations to be God’s personal possession and the focus of his
38. There are several general phrases for a council of gods that provide a conceptual par-
allel with the Hebrew Bible: phr ªilm—“the assembly of El / the gods” (Gregorio Del Olmo Lete
and Joaquín Sanmartín, “phr,” A Dictionary of the Ugaritic Language in the Alphabetic Tradition
(rev. ed.; trans. W. G. E. Watson; HONME 67; Leiden: Brill, 2003) 2:669; KTU 1.47:29, 1.118:28,
1.148:9 [hereafter, DULAT]); phr bn ªilm—“the assembly of the sons of El / the gods” (DULAT
2:669; KTU 1.4.III:14); phr kkbm—“the assembly of the stars” (DULAT 2:670; KTU 1.10.I:4; the
phrase is parallel to bn ªil in the same text; see Job 38:7–8); mphrt bn ªil—“the assembly of the
gods” (DULAT 2:566; see KTU 1.65:3; cf. 1.40:25, 42 along with bn ªil in 1.40:33, 41 and its re-
construction in parallel lines in the same text—lines 7, 16, 24; 1.62:7; 1.123:15). Of closer lin-
guistic relationship to material in the Hebrew Bible are: ºdt ªilm—“assembly of El / the gods”
(DULAT 1:152; see KTU 1.15.II: 7, 11); dr ªil—“assembly (circle) of El” (DULAT 1:279–80. See
KTU 1.15.III:19; 1.39:7; 1.162:16; 1.87:18); dr bn ªil—“assembly (circle) of the sons of El” (DULAT
1:279–80; see KTU 1.40:25, 33–34); dr dt smm—“assembly (circle) of those of heaven” (DULAT
1:279–80; see KTU 1.10.I: 3, 5); dr ªil wphr bºl—“the assembly (circle) of El and the assembly of
Baal” (DULAT 1:279–80; see KTU 1.39:7; 1.62:16; 1.87:18).
This list hardly exhausts the parallels between the dwelling place of El, which served as
the meeting place of the divine council at Ugarit, and the abode of Yahweh. For the other lin-
guistic parallels for each council and their respective modes of operation, see Heiser, “The Di-
vine Council,” 39–69. For other works that overview the divine council and the sons of God, see
Gerald Cooke, “The Sons of (the) God(s),” ZAW 76 (1964): 22–47; Mullen, The Divine Council;
idem, “Assembly, Divine,” in Anchor Bible Dictionary 2:214–17; S. B. Parker, “Sons of (the)
God(s),” in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible, 204–8 (hereafter, DDD); Matitiahu
Tsevat, “God and the Gods in Assembly,” HUCA 40–41 (1969–1970): 123–37; J. Morgenstern,
“The Mythological Background of Psalm 82,” HUCA 14 (1939): 29–126.
39. W. S. Prinsloo, “Psalm 82: Once Again, Gods or Men?” Biblica 76:2 (1995), 219–28; and
Lowell Handy, “Sounds, Words and Meanings in Psalm 82,” JSOT 47 (1990): 51–66; Cyrus Gor-
don, “µyhla in Its Reputed Meaning of Rulers, Judges,” JBL 54 (1935): 139–44.

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
20
rule. Third, why would the corrupt decisions of a group of humans shake
the foundations of the earth (v. 5)? The statement of Ps 82:5 is comprehen-
sible if the council in question were composed of cosmic beings whose
sphere of authority went beyond a human Sanhedrin.40
It is also worth pointing out that one cannot argue that the references
to the gods / sons of God outside Psalm 82 speak of humans. Job 38:7–8 has
the sons of God present at the creation of the world, rendering a human in-
terpretation impossible. The same can be said for Ps 89:5–7 (Hebrew, vv. 6–
8), where the sons of God of Yahweh’s council are in heaven in the throne
room of God, not on earth.
2.2 Deuteronomy 32 and the Canonical Israelite Worldview
The real problem with the human view of Psalm 82, however, is that this
view cannot be reconciled with the passages that form the conceptual
backdrop to Psalm 82. That is, the idea that the sons of God were created
by Yahweh and ordained to rule the nations comes from somewhere in the
biblical corpus, namely Deuteronomy 4 and 32. Those chapters clearly
speak of an act of God to divide the nations of the earth among the sons
of God as a punishment for rebellion before there ever was a nation of Israel.
As a result, the idea that the elders of Israel are the backdrop for the coun-
cil of Psalm 82 cannot be sustained. This necessitates that we turn our at-
tention to the appropriate passages in Deuteronomy.
Deut 32:8–9 When the Most High gave to the nations their inheri-
tance, when he divided mankind, he ﬁxed the borders of the peoples
according to the number of the sons of God [µyhlah ynb]. But the
Lord’s portion is his people, Jacob his allotted heritage.41 
40. There are speciﬁc reasons why human beings and God’s chosen nation Israel are re-
ferred to as God’s children in the aforementioned verses. The subject is too far-reaching for
this paper, but the foundational reason is that in the Israelite worldview, the earthly family of
the Most High was originally intended to dwell where the Most High and the heavenly council
dwelt. Hence the explicit and frequent overlap between Israelite and wider Canaanite mate-
rial with respect to descriptions of Yahweh’s abode, his council, divine Sonship (in heaven and
on earth), and council activity. The bibliography related to these themes is copious, though not
synthesized. See for example, Richard J. Clifford, The Cosmic Mountain in Canaan and the Old
Testament (HSM 4; Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1972); B. Byrne, “Sons of God”—“Seed
of Abraham”: A Study of the Idea of the Sonship of God of All Christians in Paul Against the Jewish
Background (AnBib 83; Rome: Pontiﬁcal Institute Press, 1979); Harald Risenfeld, “Sons of God
and Ecclesia: An Intertestamental Analysis,” in Renewing the Judeo-Christian Wellsprings (New
York: Crossroad Publishing Company, 1987), 89–104; James Tabor, “Firstborn of Many Broth-
ers: A Pauline Notion of Apotheosis,” Society of Biblical Literature 1984 Seminar Papers (Atlanta:
Scholars Press, 1984), 295–303; Devorah Dimant, “Men as Angels: The Self-Image of the Qum-
ran Community” in Religion and Politics in the Ancient Near East (ed. Adele Berlin; Bethesda,
MD: University Press of America, 1996), 93–103.
41. Textual critics of the Hebrew Bible are unanimous in agreement that the Qumran
reading (in brackets) is superior to the Masoretic text in Deut 32:8. See footnote 15 for docu-
mentation and discussion of this reading.

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
21
The event referred to in Deut 32:8–9 harks back to events at the Tower of
Babel. The statement in Deut 32:9 that “the Lord’s portion is his people, Ja-
cob his allotted inheritance” provides the key for understanding the con-
trast between vv. 8 and 9. In v. 9 the nation of Israel (here called “Jacob”)
is described as Yahweh’s allotted inheritance. The parallelism requires the
“nations” of v. 8 to be given as an inheritance as well, but to whom? 32:8b
provides the answer, but a parallel makes sense only if the original reading
of v. 8b included a reference to other beings (the “sons of God”) to whom
the other nations could be given.
While Deut 32:8–9 described the nations being given over to gods42
who were not Yahweh, Deut 4:19–20 gives us the opposite side of the pu-
nitive coin:
19 And beware lest you lift up your eyes to heaven, and when you see
the sun and the moon and the stars, all the host of heaven (µyim"V…h" ab:x}),
and be drawn away and bow down to them and serve them, which the
Lord your God has allotted (ql"j:) to them, to all the peoples under the
whole heaven. 20 But the Lord took (jq'l:) you and brought you out of
the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be a people of his own inheritance
(hl:j“n' µ["l} /l t/yh}lI), as you are this day. 
Tigay notes that these passages “seem to reﬂect a biblical view that . . . as
punishment for man’s repeated spurning of His authority in primordial
times (Gen. 3–11), God deprived mankind at large of true knowledge of
Himself and ordained that it should worship idols and subordinate celes-
tial beings. . . . He selected Abraham and his descendants as the objects of
His personal attention to create a model nation.” 43 In a punitive decision
reminiscent of Romans 1, then, God “gave humanity up” to their persis-
tent resistance to taking him as their Sovereign. God subsequently called
Israel into existence as His own. Hence each pagan nation was put under
42. Deut 32:8a reads µyi/G ˆ/yl}[< ljEn]h"B}. ljEn]h"B} is pointed as a Hiphil inﬁnitive absolute, but
it should probably be understood as a defective spelling of the inﬁnitive construct: ljIn}h"B}
(Sanders, Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 154). The object of the inﬁnitive form is µyi/G. As San-
ders notes, the Hiphil of the verb ljn can be “connected both with an accusativus personae (the
inheriting person; hence, “When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance”) or with
an accusativus rei (the object inherited by this person; and so rendering, “When the Most High
gave the nations as an inheritance”). Instructive parallels include Deut 1:38; 3:28; 21:16; 31:7;
Josh 1:6; 1 Sam 2:8; Zech 8:12; and Prov 8:21 (Sanders, Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 154). Both
options are syntactically possible, but which should be preferred? The answer is to be found
in Deut 32:9: “But the Lord’s portion is his people, Jacob is his allotted inheritance.” Verse nine
clearly presents the nation Jacob/Israel as being taken (cp. Deut 4:19–20) as an allotted (qlj) in-
heritance. Deuteronomy 4:19–20 makes the active “taking” clear. Note also the wordplay with
the Hiphil verb in v. 8. The parallelism of MT’s verse nine would require “nations” be given
as an inheritance to the sons of God by the Most High.
43. Tigay, Deuteronomy, 435. The same idea contained in these verses also seems to be the
point of 1 Samuel 26:19, quoting a distraught David: “Now let my lord the king listen to his
servant’s words. If the Lord has incited you against me, then may he accept an offering. If,
however, men have done it, may they be cursed before the Lord! They have now driven me
from my share in the Lord’s inheritance and have said, ‘Go, serve other gods’” (niv).

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
22
the administration of a being of inferior status to Yahweh, but Israel would
be tended to by the “God of gods,” the “Lord of lords” (Deut 10:17).44 This
backdrop to Psalm 82 renders untenable the view that the µyhIløa” of that
psalm are humans.
2.3 The Host of Heaven: Idols Only?
The last objection offered by scholars concerned with perceived implica-
tions of divine plurality in the Hebrew Bible are that the host of heaven
referenced by Deut 4:19–20 (and so, Deut 32:8–9) are merely idols. While
the Old Testament at times refers to idols as µyhIløa”—something inevitable
for the biblical writer given the behavior of the Gentile nations—it is not
coherent to argue that the Old Testament writer always intends to convey
to readers that the gods of the nations are idols.
When this argument is put forth, it is frequently inferred from Deut
4:15–18, where God, through Moses, warns His people to not make idols,
lest they be turned aside to worship the sun, moon, stars, etc. However,
as noted brieﬂy above, Deut 32:17 quite clearly has Moses referring to
the other µyhIløa” as evil spiritual entities (µydv): “They [Israel] sacriﬁced to
demons (µydiV´l") who are not God (H'løa”),45 to gods (µyhIløa”) they did not
know; new ones that had come along recently, whom your fathers had
not reverenced.”
Other passages from Deuteronomy make it clear that idols are not in
view when it comes to host of heaven language, in that the gods referred
to are those entities whom Yahweh allotted to the other nations.46 Trian-
gulating Deut 4:19–20; 32:8–9 with other references to the foreign gods in
Deuteronomy—the gods / host of heaven allotted to other nations, gods
whom Israel “had not known”—compels the conclusion that the biblical
writer considered them real entities. These gods, whom Israel later wor-
shipped in apostasy, are called demons. To have these other gods as only
idols would then mean that Yahweh instituted idolatry among the nations.
The following verses are relevant:
Deut 17:2–3 2 If there is found among you, within any of your towns
which the Lord your God is giving you, a man or woman who does
what is evil in the sight of the Lord your God, in transgressing his
covenant, 3 who has gone and served other gods (µyhIløa”) and bowed
down before them, the sun or the moon or any of the host of heaven
(µyim"V…h" ab:x}Alk:l}), which I have forbidden. . . .47
44. See n. 18 on the singular form. 
45. Since H'løa” is singular, the translation “. . . who are not gods” is inaccurate. Addition-
ally, H'løa” is spelled without mappiq in BHS (Westminster 4.0, 4.2) in Deut 32:17. BHS does have
mappiq in most cases where the form is spelled plene (H'/la”), as often occurs in Job. However,
the plene spelling occurs in Deut 32:15 without mappiq in BHS.
46. Passages outside Deuteronomy need to be similarly contextualized. For example,
1 Kgs 14:9 should be balanced with texts such as 2 Kgs 19:18.
47. The prohibition was given in Deut 4:19–20.

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
23
Deut 29:25 They turned to the service of other gods (µyhIløa”) and wor-
shiped them, gods whom they had not known and whom He [God]
had not allotted (ql"j:) to them. 
The retrospect to the warnings and worldview of Deut 4:19–20; 32:8–9 is
unmistakable. It is hardly persuasive to assume the writer would have
Yahweh setting statues of wood and stone over the nations. Moreover, to
be consistent, any interpretation of Deut 4:19–20 and 32:8–9 must be co-
herent in Psalm 82. It is equally incoherent that Yahweh would sentence
the other µyhIløa” to die like mortals if they were only wood and stone, or
that Yahweh would be presiding over wood and stone statues in heaven
(cf. Ps 89:5–7 [Hebrew, vv. 6–8]). The writer of Deuteronomy did not con-
sider the host of heaven (sun, moon, starry host) whom Yahweh allotted to
the Gentile nations only as humanly fabricated idols.
It is also unsustainable to suppose that the biblical writer merely
sought to prohibit the worship of idols associated with astronomical phe-
nomena. It was commonly believed in the ancient world, including Israel,
that the heavenly bodies were either animate beings or were inhabited or
controlled by animate beings.48 The classic divine council passage, 1 Kgs 22,
utilizes the heavenly host terminology for what are clearly divine beings:
19 And Micaiah said, “Therefore hear the word of the Lord: I saw the
Lord sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven (µyim"V…h" ab:x})
standing (dmE[ø) beside him on his right hand and on his left. 20 and the
Lord said, ‘Who will entice Ahab, that he may go up and fall at
Ramoth-gilead?’ And one said one thing, and another said another. 21
Then a spirit (j'Wrh:) came forward (axEYew') and stood before the Lord,
saying, ‘I will entice him.’ 22 And the Lord said to him, ‘By what
means?’ And he said, ‘I will go out, and will be a lying spirit in the
mouth of all his prophets.’ And he said, ‘You are to entice him, and
you shall succeed; go out and do so.’ 23 Now therefore behold, the
Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these your prophets; the
Lord has declared disaster for you.” (english standard version)
Yahweh is not holding council with physical chunks of stone and balls of
gas. The text clearly equates the host of heaven with spiritual beings (a
member of the host “comes forth,” “stands” before Yahweh, and speaks;
v. 21). This issue brings to light another signiﬁcant problem for those who
seek to deny that such language refers to real divine entities in the canon-
ical worldview of Israel. Consider the following texts:
Neh 9:6 6 You are the Lord, you alone. You have made heaven, the
heaven of heavens, and all their host (µa:b:x}Alk:w]), the earth and all that
is upon it, the seas and all that is in them; and you preserve all of
them; and the host of heaven (µyim"V…h" ab:x}) worships you. 
48. F. Lelli, “Stars,” DDD, 809–15; I. Zatelli, “Astrology and the Worship of the Stars in the
Bible.” ZAW 103 (1991): 86–99.

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
24
Ps 148:1–5 1 Praise the Lord! Praise the Lord from the heavens;
praise him in the heights! 2 Praise him, all his angels (wyk:a:l}m"); praise
him, all his hosts (/ya:b:x})! 3 Praise him, sun and moon, praise him, all
you shining stars! 4 Praise him, you highest heavens, and you waters
above the heavens! 5 Let them praise the name of the Lord! For he
commanded and they were created.
The parallelism in these passages makes clear the conceptual overlap, in
that it has the heavenly host worshipping and praising Yahweh, their cre-
ator. The description is also point-for-point consistent with the broader
ancient Near Eastern worldview that assumed that the stars were animate
beings.49 Readers familiar with conceptual metaphor know that one can-
not argue that the language in these texts is merely poetic, as though poetic
expressions do not convey the actual belief system of the ancient writer.
Conceptual metaphors or poetic expressions are not based on what a per-
son’s view of reality does not entail. Rather, the metaphor is a means of
framing and categorizing something that is believed. Further, there is little
coherence in the idea that theological content cannot be drawn from poetic
texts. One wonders what moderns could know about the beliefs of any of
the ancient Near Eastern civilizations if we eliminated from consideration
what we read in their poetic epics. Taking the Baal Cycle as a speciﬁc ex-
ample, we would very little about the religious belief of the people of
Ugarit if we took such an approach.
2.4 The First Commandment: “No Other Gods before Me”
The ﬁrst commandment of the Decalogue (Exod 20:3) charged the Israel-
ites, “You shall have no other gods (µyhIløa”) before me (yn;p:Al[").” It has
longed been observed that this command does not actually deny the ex-
istence of other gods, despite being a very obvious opportunity to make
such a position clear. Rather, the focus is on which god is exclusively wor-
thy of worship.50 If that be the case, then the question of what exactly is
meant that no other gods are “before” (ynpAl[) Yahweh must be answered.
Building on an observation of Werner Schmidt, that while the command
does not explicitly deny that other gods exist, it likely prohibits other gods
from being in Yahweh’s presence, John H. Walton suggests that the phrase
ynpAl[ should be understood spatially in Exod 20:3, with the result that
other gods are removed from the picture of Yahweh’s governance.51 More
49. See Stadelmann, The Hebrew Conception of the World.
50. See for example: Umberto Cassuto, Commentary on Exodus (Jerusalem: Magnes, 1967),
235–41; Brevard Childs, Exodus (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1974), 402–4; John Durham, Exodus
19–40 (WBC 3; Waco: Word, 1987), 284–85; Moshe Greenberg, “The Decalogue Tradition Crit-
ically Examined,” in The Ten Commandments in History and Tradition (ed. B. Segal and G. Levi;
Jerusalem: Magnes, 1985), 83–120; Tigay, Deuteronomy, 63–64.
51. John H. Walton, “Interpreting the Bible as an Ancient Near Eastern Document” (pa-
per presented at Southern Seminary, 2004), 11–13. I am grateful to Dr. Walton for supplying
me with a copy of his essay prior to its publication.

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
25
speciﬁcally, Walton argues that when ynpAl[ occurs with a sufﬁxed object
pronoun that is personal, or a stated object that is a person, the resulting
phrase should be understood spatially. If the ﬁrst commandment is un-
derstood in this light, the conclusion follows in Walton’s analysis:
The Israelites were not to construe Yahweh as operating within a com-
munity of gods. There was to be no thought of pantheon or consort.
He does not function as the head of a pantheon with a divine assem-
bly. In short, he works alone. The signiﬁcance of this is that the pan-
theon/divine assembly concept carried with it the idea of distribution
of power among many divine beings. The ﬁrst commandment be-
comes a simple statement that Yahweh’s power is absolute, not being
distributed among other deities or limited by the will of the assembly
. . . Although it does not say explicitly that no other gods exist, it does
remove them from the presence of Yahweh. If Yahweh does not share
power, authority or jurisdiction with them, they are not gods in any
meaningful sense of the word. The ﬁrst commandment does not insist
that the other gods are non-existent, but that they are powerless; it
disenfranchises them. It does not simply say that they should not be
worshiped; it leaves them with no status worthy of worship.52
Certain parts of this interpretation of the Decalogue are quite consistent
with the views put forth in this article. The ﬁrst commandment does not
deny the existence of other gods. Yahweh is certainly incomparable, hold-
ing absolute, unlimited power. The framing of the argument and other
conclusions that extend from it make it difﬁcult to sustain, however.
There are certainly instances where ynpAl[ is coupled with a sufﬁxed
object pronoun that refers to a person, or where ynpAl[ is followed by a
personal stated object, where the phrase either cannot be understood spa-
tially, or where doing so would result in very awkward exegesis. For ex-
ample, a syntactical search53 of the Hebrew Bible for both constructions
yields examples such as Deut 21:16 (“then on the day when he assigns his
possessions as an inheritance to his sons, he may not treat the beloved son
as the ﬁrstborn in place of the son who is not preferred [ha:WnC‘h"Aˆb< yneP}Al[",
who is the ﬁrstborn”). The sense here is not spatial, but perhaps temporal
(giving the beloved son an inheritance before the less preferred ﬁrstborn) or
abstractly locational (giving the beloved son an inheritance in place of the
less preferred ﬁrstborn). Other examples include Deut 2:25 (“This day I
will begin to put the dread and fear of you on the peoples [µyMI["h: yneP}Al["] who
are under the whole heaven . . .”), where the idea appears to be a fear put
into the hearts of the foreign people, not something in their literal presence
in a spatial sense. In Gen 32:22 Jacob’s bribe of Esau “. . . passed on ahead of
him (yn;P:Al["; i.e., Jacob),” an instance where the context conveys something
52. Ibid., 13–14.
53. These two constructions were searched using the syntactically tagged database of the
Hebrew Bible created by Francis I. Andersen and A. Dean Forbes, The Andersen-Forbes Phrase
Marker Analysis, Logos Bible Software, Bellingham, WA, 2006.

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
26
quite antithetical to the spatial meaning—the gift was certainly not in Ja-
cob’s presence as he had sent it away to Esau. Consequently, the fact that
the spatial sense can be conveyed in the Hebrew Bible is not an argument
that it is conveyed in Exod 20:3.
Other elements of Walton’s conclusion are more fundamentally prob-
lematic. The statement that Yahweh “does not function as the head of a
pantheon with a divine assembly” cannot be upheld. If this were the cor-
rect interpretation of the ﬁrst commandment, it would stand out as a glar-
ing contradiction to several explicit texts discussed above that have
Yahweh superior in the heavenly council among its divine constituent
members. This assertion is not the primary focus of Walton’s conclusion,
though. The idea that Yahweh does not share power appears to be more of
a concern. The coherence of this conclusion depends on what is meant by
“sharing” power. Walton claims the other gods have been completely dis-
enfranchised, and that this disenfranchisement is what makes them un-
worthy of worship.
There are two problems with this articulation. First, there is an un-
necessary link between shared power and being unworthy of worship. As
has been detailed here, Yahweh’s ontological uniqueness and incompara-
ble power are the basis of his exclusive claim to worship, not whether he
shares power with lesser beings. One can embrace that Yahweh is the
unique, incomparable, sovereign head of his divine council without imag-
ining any circumstance where the lesser members deserve worship. 
Second, the Scripture is clear that Yahweh does indeed share his power
with the members of his heavenly host, albeit while retaining his ultimate
sovereignty. Several of the passages considered above make this unmis-
takable. The disinheritance of the nations and their subjugation under the
sons of God in Deut 4:19–20; 32:8–9 portray a sovereign act of Yahweh,
whereby he rejects direct rule of rebellious humanity. The sons of God are
not portrayed as presumptively moving into this vacuum. They were put
over the nations by Yahweh, and then subsequently judged in Psalm 82 for
their corrupt administration. This is shared dominion, albeit of a punitive
bent. Yahweh must be the sovereign head of these beings in Israelite reli-
gion, otherwise a truly polytheistic picture would emerge. The biblical au-
thor was careful to make Yahweh’s headship clear. The same portrayal was
seen in 1 Kgs 22:19–23, where Yahweh decrees the end of Ahab but leaves
it to the members of his council to accomplish his sovereign will. This
shared, symbiotic rulership is illustrated again in Dan 4:17 [Aramaic 4:14].
Nebuchadnezzar’s humiliation is described as handed down by members
of the heavenly host who are working under the authority of God: “The
sentence is by decree of the watchers, and the decision is by the word of
the holy ones, to the end that the living may know that the Most High
rules the kingdom of men and gives it to whomever he wants, and sets it
over the humblest of men.” It isn’t clear just what role the members of the
heavenly host play in the decree, but it cannot be said they had no role at
all. How would the writer wish to convey that point by utilizing such vo-

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
27
cabulary? 1 Kings 22 might perhaps provide an analogy. There the mem-
bers of the heavenly council participated in the decision, not in terms of
Yahweh’s decree that it was time for Ahab’s death, but in the way that his
death would be accomplished. This description of decision-making capac-
ity on the part of lesser µyhIløa” plays an important role in what Patrick Miller
referred to as the “cosmic-political” role of the divine council, a fundamen-
tal component of Israelite religion and Old Testament theology.54
The ﬁrst commandment, then, does not constitute any sort of denial of
the existence of other gods or of the divine council in Israelite religion. The
point of the command, like so many other declarations in the Torah and
elsewhere, is that Israelites were to have Yahweh as their sole object of
worship.55
3. Monotheism, Henotheism, Monolatry, or Polytheism? 
The Inadequacy of Modern Terminology 
for Orthodox Yahwism
Does the afﬁrmation of the reality of other µyhIløa” by the canonical authors
disqualify Israelite religion as monotheistic? Are other terms used in aca-
demic discourse for ancient religious pantheons more appropriate? The
short answer to both questions, in my view, is a qualiﬁed no. The answer
is qualiﬁed with respect to the realization that little is solved by applying
or refusing to apply a single modern term to Israel’s ancient view of God.
“Monotheism” as a term was coined in the 17th century not as an ant-
onym to “polytheism,” but to “atheism.”56 A monotheist, then, was a person
who believed there was a God, not someone who believed there was only
one spiritual entity that could or should be named by the letters G-O-D.
This understanding of the term has been lost in contemporary discourse,
and so it would be pointless to call for its re-introduction.
A more coherent approach is to describe what Israelites believed about
their God rather than trying to encapsulate that belief in a single word.
When scholars have addressed this tension, however, a shift to description
over terminology has not been the strategy. Rather, scholars have tried to
qualify the modern vocabulary. Terms like “inclusive monotheism” or “tol-
erant monolatry” have been coined in an attempt to accurately classify
54. Patrick D. Miller, “Cosmology and World Order in the Old Testament: The Divine
Council as Cosmic-Political Symbol,” in Israelite Religion and Biblical Theology: Collected Essays
(ed. Patrick D. Miller; JSOTSup 267; Shefﬁeld: Shefﬁeld Academic Press, 2000), 422–44.
55. Bruce Waltke and Michael O’Connor capture this meaning in their understanding of
ynpAl[ in Exod 20:3—“Thou shalt have no other gods over against me” (Bruce K. Waltke and
Michael O’Connor, An Introduction to Biblical Hebrew Syntax (Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns,
1990), 218.
56. MacDonald, Deuteronomy and the Meaning of ‘Monotheism,’ 1–21. As studies of the ori-
gin and development of the term show, “monotheism” was initially not meant as an antonym
to “polytheism” but to “atheism.”

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
28
Israelite religion in both preexilic and postexilic stages.57 These terms
have not found broad acceptance because they are oxymoronic to the
modern ear.
Other scholars have argued for an “incipient monotheism” that could
perhaps include the afﬁrmation of other gods who were inferior. There is
precedent for this idea in the scholarly exchanges over henotheism, mono-
latry, and Israelite religion. Historically, henotheism assumes all gods are
species equals and the elevation of one god is due to socio-political fac-
tors—not theological nuancing. Quoting Max Müller’s seminal work on the
subject, Yusa writes that henotheism was a technical term coined “to des-
ignate a peculiar form of polytheism . . . [where] each god is, ‘at the time a
real divinity, supreme and absolute’ not limited by the powers of any other
gods.”58 Müller called this idea “belief in single gods . . . a worship of one
god after another.”59 T. J. Meek referred to preexilic Israelite religion as both
henotheistic and monolatrous,60 thereby equating the two, based on the
prohibition of worshipping other gods. But did the canonical Israelite
writer believe that Yahweh was superior on the basis of socio-political fac-
tors, or was Yahweh intrinsically “other” with respect to his nature and cer-
tain attributes? Did the writer view Yahweh as only a being who could not
be limited by the powers of other deities, or was there something unique
about Yahweh that both transcended and produced this total freedom?
H. H. Rowley, reacting to the work of Meek, moved toward the idea of
uniqueness but did so using the word “henotheism.” What distinguished
Mosaic religion in his mind from that of other “henotheists” was “not so
much the teaching that Yahweh was to be the only God for Israel as the
proclamation that Yahweh was unique.”61 Rowley’s focus on uniqueness
was on the right track, but his approach has the disadvantage of trying to
convince the academic community to redeﬁne a term whose meaning by
now is entrenched.
The proposal offered here is that scholars should stop trying to deﬁne
Israel’s religion with singular, imprecise modern terms and instead stick to
describing what Israel believed. “Monotheism” as it is currently under-
stood means that no other gods exist. This term is inadequate for describ-
ing Israelite religion, but suggesting it be done away with would no doubt
cause considerable consternation among certain parts of the academic com-
57. For these terms and their discussion, see Juha Pakkala, Intolerant Monotheism in the
Deuteronomistic History (Publications of the Finnish Exegetical Society 76; Göttingen: Vanden-
hoeck & Ruprecht, 1999), 1–20, 224–33; MacDonald, Deuteronomy and the Meaning of ‘Monothe-
ism,’ 21–71.
58. Yusa, “Henotheism,” Encyclopedia of Religion 6:266. Yusa is quoting from F. Max Müller,
Selected Essays on Language, Mythology, and Religion, vol. 2 (1881; repr. New York: AMS, 1978),
136–37.
59. Yusa, “Henotheism,” Encyclopedia of Religion 6:266. 
60. T. J. Meek, “Monotheism and the Religion of Israel,” JBL 61 (1942): 21–43.
61. H. H. Rowley, “Moses and Monotheism,” in From Moses to Qumran: Studies in the Old
Testament (New York: Association Press, 1963), 45. 

---PAGE---
Heiser: Monotheism, Polytheism, Monolatry, or Henotheism?
29
munity, not to mention the interested laity. “Henotheism” and “monola-
try,” while perhaps better, are inadequate because they do not say enough
about what the canonical writer believed. Israel was certainly “monola-
trous,” but that term comments only on what Israel believed about the
proper object of worship, not what it believed about Yahweh’s nature and
attributes with respect to the other gods.
In my judgment, describing what Israel believed about Yahweh need
not involve the kind of high philosophical speculation that most modern
scholarship wants to deny the ancient Israelite. Several simple ideas have
been communicated to the reader by the canonical authors that allow a de-
scription that demonstrates a ﬁrm, uncompromising belief in Yahweh’s
“species uniqueness” among the other gods assumed to exist. Israel did not
believe the other gods were species-equal with Yahweh and essentially in-
terchangeable. Israel did not believe that Yahweh should be viewed as the
supreme god only because of his deeds on behalf of Israel. The canonical
authors considered Yahweh to be in a class by himself. He was “species-
unique.”62
In briefest terms, the statements in the canonical text (poetic or other-
wise) inform the reader that, for the biblical writer, Yahweh was an µyhIløa”,
but no other µyhIløa” was Yahweh—and never was nor could be. This notion al-
lows for the existence of other µyhIløa” and is more precise than the terms
“polytheism” and “henotheism.” It is also more accurate than “mono-
theism,” though it preserves the element of that conception that is most
important to traditional Judaism and Christianity: Yahweh’s solitary “oth-
erness” with respect to all that is, in heaven and in earth.
But on what grounds can this description be derived? The elements of
the text that allow this approach have been copiously documented in the
scholarly literature. As Isa 43:10 and 44:6–8 afﬁrm, the canonical writers as-
sumed that their God was uncreated and always existed and that the other
gods were subsequent. This alone points to intrinsic superiority to and dis-
tinction from all the other gods. The other gods were not, chronologically
speaking, co-existent. Moreover, the pre-existent and uncreated Yahweh
created all the other members of the host of heaven (Neh 9:6, Ps 148:1–5).
Their life derives from him, not vice versa. Rather than socio-political fac-
tors, the canonical writer believed the God of Israel alone was sovereign
62. Interestingly, species uniqueness is the basis for God’s distinction from the other gods
in later Jewish writers. For example, 2 (Slavonic) Enoch (J) 2:2 afﬁrms that while other gods are
feckless, they exist and are temporary: “And do not turn away from the Lord, and worship
vain gods, gods who did not create the heaven and the earth or any created thing; for they will
perish, and so will those who worship them.” The same book later has God inform Enoch that,
“There is no adviser and no successor to my creation. I am self-eternal and not made by
hands” (33:4). Sibylline Oracles confess that “God is alone, unique, and supreme” since he is
“self-generated [and] unbegotten.” Yet in the same text one reads that, “if gods beget and yet
remain immortal, there would have been more gods born than men.” See John J. Collins, “Siby-
lline Oracles, Fragments,” OTP 1:470 (the citations are from Fragment 1:16; Fragment 2:1;
Fragment 3:4).

---PAGE---
Bulletin for Biblical Research 18.1
30
and deserving of worship because his nature was unique (pre-existence)
and his power was unquestionably superior (creator of all that is).
One could object that the idea of “species uniqueness” is unintelli-
gible with respect to divine beings, perhaps by analogy to the human
world. I am human, yet no other human is me, but all humans share the
same species status. Hence one can be unique in properties, but species
uniqueness is a fallacy. The analogy with humankind is ﬂawed, however,
since no such claim as pre-existence before all humans is seriously offered.
An attribute shared by no other member in the species by deﬁnition makes
that entity species unique despite any other shared qualities.63 In other
words, a species unique being need not be unique in every attribute. The
entity must only be considered to be set apart in a way or ways that are
completely exclusive.
Conclusion
The approach to divine plurality and the matter of monotheism offered
here is theologically and philosophically sound, while giving primacy of
place to the data of the Hebrew Bible. Scholarship is not advanced by ele-
vating presuppositions to the level of hermeneutical ﬁlters or by forcing
vocabulary, grammar, syntax, and comparative data in a comfortable theo-
logical box. It is my hope that scholars will be encouraged to re-evaluate
their assumptions about the reality of divine plurality in Israel’s world-
view and how to parse that reality in understanding Israelite religion.
63. This issue would take us into the matter of just what is an µyhIløa” is. Traditional theo-
logians have operated on the assumption that the word µyhIløa” denotes an ontologically unique
thing or person. Those who work in the Hebrew text, however, know that there are variety of
beings referred to as µyhIløa”. In addition to the many references in this article to the µyhIløa” of the
Gentile nations, the Hebrew Bible describes several other beings or groups of beings as µyhIløa”:
(1) demons (Deut 32:17); (2) spirits from Sheol (including the human dead; 1 Sam 28:13);
(3) the Angel of Yahweh (Hos 12:4–5 [Hebrew text] and Gen 48:15–16, noting the compounded
subjects with the singular verb Ëreb:y]); and (4) perhaps even angels (see Gen 28:12 and 32:1–2,
with 35:1–7, noting the alternation between singular and plural predication). The data dem-
onstrates that µyhIløa” is not restricted to Yahweh, and so the term itself cannot denote an on-
tologically unique being. That assumption is, at least in part, drawn from the use of µyhIløa” as
a proper noun for the God of Israel. But that usage is in no way exclusive. In briefest terms,
an µyhIløa” is a being whose proper “habitation” was considered the “spirit world,” and whose
primary existence was a disembodied one. Hence Yahweh is an µyhIløa”, but he has attributes
that nonetheless make him species unique with respect to all µyhIløa”. 

---PAGE---
