Naked Bible Podcast                                                               Episode 8: Baptism and Problem Passages: 1 Peter 3: 14-22
Naked Bible Podcast Transcript 
Episode 8 
Baptism and Problem Passages: 1 Peter 3:14-22 
Recorded in 2012 
Teacher: Dr. Michael S. Heiser (MH) 
1 Peter 3:14-22 is an odd, controversial passage since it amalgamates, 
baptism, salvation, Noah, the ark, and Jesus’ descent to preach to 
spirits in the Underworld. The key to understanding the passage is to 
recognize that Peter embraces the worldview of non-canonical Jewish 
literature like 1 Enoch and seems an analogy between the events of 
Genesis 6-8, salvation, and baptism. 
Transcript 
Welcome once again to the Naked Bible Podcast. The last podcast episode 
ended my summary of the problems with the way baptism gets talked about any 
my solutions to those problems. Now I want to take some time in the next few 
episodes to go through some difficult passages relating to baptism. In today's 
episode we'll tackle 1 Peter 3:14-22. So I want to read that to you now. 
14 But even if you should suffer for righteousness' sake, you will be 
blessed. Have no fear of them, nor be troubled,15 but in your hearts 
honor Christ the Lord as holy, always being prepared to make a 
defense to anyone who asks you for a reason for the hope that is in 
you; yet do it with gentleness and respect, 16 having a good 
conscience, so that, when you are slandered, those who revile your 
good behavior in Christ may be put to shame.17 For it is better to 
suffer for doing good, if that should be God's will, than for doing evil. 
18 For Christ also suffered once for sins, the righteous for the 
unrighteous, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the 
flesh but made alive in the spirit, 19 in which he went 
and proclaimed to the spirits in prison, 20 because they formerly did 
not obey, when God's patience waited in the days of Noah, while the 
ark was being prepared, in which a few, that is, eight persons, were 
brought safely through water.21 Baptism, which corresponds to 
this, now saves you, not as a removal of dirt from the body but as an 
appeal to God for a good conscience, through the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ, 22 who has gone into heaven and is at the right hand of 
!1

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                               Episode 8: Baptism and Problem Passages: 1 Peter 3: 14-22
God, with angels, authorities, and powers having been subjected to 
him. 
It's not hard to see how this passage is controversial. I was actually in a church 
service once where a pastor was preaching through 1 Peter, and when we got to 
this passage he simply said it was too weird and skipped it. There's nothing like 
giving people the whole council of God or putting some research time into your 
sermon! It's too bad, too, since this passage actually portrays baptism in a 
dramatic way. It shows baptism to be a declaration of spiritual warfare—whose 
side you're on.  
The overall theme of 1 Peter is that Christians must withstand persecution and 
persevere in their faith. That much is clear in this passage. But what's with 
baptism? And then adding the ark of Noah and spirits in prison? And does this 
passage say that baptism saves us? It doesn't. But to understand what's going 
on in Peter's head, we have to understand a concept that scholars have called 
"types" or "typology."  
Typology is a kind of prophecy. We're all familiar with predictive verbal prophecy 
(when a prophet announces that something is going to come to pass in the 
future). Sometimes that comes out of the blue, with God impressing thoughts on 
the prophet's mind that the prophet utters. On other occasions, a prophet might 
take an object or perform some action and tell people that the thing or action 
prefigures something that will happen. Ezekiel was notorious for this, like the time 
God told him to shave his head and beard and then weigh the hair in the 
balances, then burn a third of it, beat a third of it with a sword, and scatter the 
last third to the wind to visually portray the future of the city of Jerusalem (Ezekiel 
5). But we only know what Ezekiel's antics meant because they're spelled out in 
his prophecies. Ezekiel 5 tells us these are prophecies and what the fulfillment 
would be. But types work differently.  
A type is basically an unspoken prophecy. It's an event, a person, or an institution 
that foreshadows something that will come, but which isn't revealed until after the 
fact. For example, in Romans 5:14, Paul tells us that Adam was a typos of Christ. 
This Greek word means "kind" or "mark" or "type." It's actually where "typology" 
comes from. Paul was saying that in some way, Adam foreshadowed, or echoed, 
something about Jesus. In Adam's case, that something was how his act (his sin) 
had an effect on all humanity. Like Adam, Jesus also did something that would 
have an impact on all humanity—his death and resurrection. Another example 
would be Passover, since it prefigured the crucifixion of Jesus, who was called 
the Lamb of God. The point is that there was some analogous connection 
between the type (Adam) and its echo, or anti-type (Jesus).  
So how does this relate to our weird passage in 1 Peter? Peter uses typology in 
1 Peter 3:14-22. Specifically, he assumes that the great flood in Genesis 6-8 and 
the sons of God event in Genesis 6:1-4 typify or foreshadow the gospel and the 
!2
5:00

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                               Episode 8: Baptism and Problem Passages: 1 Peter 3: 14-22
resurrection in some way. For Peter, these events were commemorated 
somehow during baptism. That needs some unpacking. 
There are some tight connections between Genesis 6:1-4 and the epistle of 2 
Peter and Jude. Peter and Jude were very familiar with Jewish tradition about 
Genesis 6, found in books like 1 Enoch, and believed them. 1 Enoch 6-15 
describes how the sons of God (also called "Watchers" in that book) who 
committed the offense of Genesis 6:1-4 were imprisoned under the earth (in the 
underworld) for what they had done. The Watchers appealed their sentence and 
they asked Enoch (in the book of 1 Enoch), the biblical prophet who never died 
(according to Genesis 5) to intercede for them. Now 1 Enoch 6:4 puts it this way: 
They [the Watchers] asked that I [Enoch is the speaker] write a 
memorandum of petition for them, that they might have forgiveness, and 
that I write the memorandum of petition for them in the presence of the 
Lord of Heaven. 
Now God sent back his response, also by way of Enoch, who went to the 
imprisoned spirits and announced to them that their appeal had been denied. 
That is described in 1 Enoch 13:1-3 and chapter 14:4, 5. Here are some 
excerpts. Verse 1 from chapter 13 says (with God as the speaker): 
And Enoch, go and say to Azazel, "You will have no peace." A great 
sentence has gone forth against you to bind you. You will have no relief or 
petition because of the unrighteous deeds that you have revealed, 
because of all the godless deeds and the unrighteousness and the sin 
that you revealed to men. And then I [Enoch] went and spoke to all of 
them [the spirits in prison] together, and they were all afraid, and 
trembling and fear seized them. 
Now 1 Enoch goes on to describe the prison term as being "until the end of 
days," language that refers to the end-times. 2 Peter 2:4 and Jude 6 make 
specific reference to the episode of Genesis 6:1-4 and the imprisonment of these 
fallen divine beings in the underworld. The incident was also on Peter's mind 
when he wrote his first epistle in our strange passage. Peter saw a theological 
analogy between the events of Genesis 6 and the events of Enoch's intercession 
from 1 Enoch and their fallout with the gospel and the resurrection. In other 
words, he considered these events to be types or prefigurements or precursors 
to New Testament events and ideas.  
So what we have is that just as Jesus was the second Adam for Paul, Jesus is 
the second Enoch for Peter. Enoch descended to the imprisoned fallen angels to 
announce their doom. 1 Peter 3:14-22 has Jesus descending to these same 
spirits in prison—the fallen angels—to tell them they were still defeated, despite 
his crucifixion. God's plan of salvation and kingdom rule was still intact. In fact, it 
was right on schedule. The crucifixion actually meant victory over every demonic 
force opposed to God. The spiritual war was won at the crucifixion, and following 
!3
10:00

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                               Episode 8: Baptism and Problem Passages: 1 Peter 3: 14-22
the Enochian typology here shows us that just as Enoch proclaimed the 
Watchers' doom, so Jesus repeats the act, announcing that his death certified 
victory over the realm of death and all those spiritual forces consigned to the dark 
world. The victory declaration of 1 Peter 3:14-22 ends with Jesus risen from the 
dead and set at the right hand of God above all angels, authorities, and powers.  
So how does this relate to baptism? How is baptism tied to the logic of the 
passage? Here's the relevant portion once more, starting with verse 18: 
18 For Christ also suffered once for sins, the righteous for the 
unrighteous, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the 
flesh but made alive in the spirit, 19 in which he went 
and proclaimed to the spirits in prison, 20 because they formerly did 
not obey, when God's patience waited in the days of Noah, while the 
ark was being prepared, in which a few, that is, eight persons, were 
brought safely through water. 
And now the anti-type, that is, baptism: 
21 Baptism, which corresponds to this, now saves you, not as a 
removal of dirt from the body but as an appeal to God for a good 
conscience, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 22 who has gone 
into heaven and is at the right hand of God, with angels, authorities, 
and powers having been subjected to him. 
Now, two words in verse 21 need consideration. The word most often translated 
"appeal" (eperotema) in verse 21 is best understood as "pledge" here, a meaning 
that it has in other material. Likewise, the word "conscience" (syneidesis) does 
not refer to the inner voice of right and wrong here as it does elsewhere. Rather, 
the word refers to an attitude or decision that reflects one's loyalty, or perhaps 
something like "conscientiousness" (a usage that is also found in other contexts).  
So how does this help us understand the passage? Briefly, baptism is not what 
produces salvation. It saves in that it first involves or reflects a heart decision—a 
pledge of loyalty—to the risen savior. In effect, baptism in New Testament 
theology is a loyalty oath—a public avowal of who is on the Lord's side in the 
cosmic war between good and evil. But in addition to that, it is also a visceral 
reminder to the defeated fallen angels. Every baptism is a reiteration of their 
doom in the wake of the gospel and the Kingdom of God. Early Christians 
understood the typology of this passage and its link back to the fallen angels of 
Genesis 6. Early baptismal formulas included a renunciation of Satan and his 
angels for this very reason. 
Baptism was—and still ought to be—spiritual warfare. 
!4

---PAGE---
