Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
1 
Naked Bible Podcast Transcript 
Episode 17 
Hebrews 1:5-14 
September 9, 2017 
 
Teacher: Dr. Michael S. Heiser (MH) 
Host: Trey Stricklin (TS) 
 
The writer of Hebrews builds on his assertions that the particular son of 
God (Jesus) who was the agent of creation, eternal wisdom, and the 
essence of God, by comparing him to other supernatural sons of God 
(angels). But what does a phrase like “You are my son, today I have 
begotten you” mean? Does this mean Jesus was a created being? This 
episode notes the use of this phrase and other Old Testament passages 
utilized by the writer of Hebrews to explore its actual meaning. Along the 
way, the episode discusses two links in Hebrews 1 to the Deuteronomy 
32 worldview and the divine council. 
 
 
Transcript 
 
TS: Welcome to the Naked Bible Podcast, Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14. I'm the 
layman, Trey Stricklin, and he's the scholar, Dr. Michael Heiser. Hey, Mike, how 
are you doing? 
 
MH: Pretty good. We have something interesting and exciting to talk about this 
week, both in terms of the content and something else. 
 
TS: Yeah, actually Faithlife is doing another sponsorship, so we appreciate that. 
This time they're actually going to do the Logos Mobile Education from Faithlife, 
which lets you learn from leading Christian scholars like yourself who are 
teaching from all areas of expertise. Courses offer access and instructions from 
leading theologians, including you! Naked Bible Podcast listeners are going to 
receive 40% off your Jewish Trinity course by going 
to www.logos.com/nakedbiblepodcast. Mike, what is the course about? 
 
MH: This is a really good deal. The Jewish Trinity course is a video course that's 
really oriented around the idea of God as man in the Old Testament—the Old 
Testament Godhood material (Two Powers in Heaven sort of stuff). This was one 
of our early Mobile Ed courses.  
 
Some listeners will know that I was one of the founding people involved in this 
product line. When we were actually thinking about creating Mobile Ed, one of 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
2 
the thoughts that went into it was—just as the title suggests—mobile ed. You 
could get an education no matter where you are. We sort of tried to create it very 
intentionally. The video segments of my course and all the other courses are 
short, discreet video lecture segments. And then the content of those in post-
production... There are people in the building who take the content and produce 
a transcript from it, and then they use the transcript to link into other sources, 
either in the software or, in some cases, out of it. You actually sort of get 
guidance once you watch the video to other material that expands upon the 
content of the video. It's designed very deliberately. It doesn't matter what 
platform you use. It's cross-platform. You can use a mobile device, computer, or 
desktop.  
 
The neat thing is if you took advantage of the free download (and I think you can 
still take advantage of that), there are other ways to get the platform on your 
computer, anyway, for free. And the apps are free, too. If you get this course and 
let’s say you start it on your desktop at one location and you have to stop and 
then you're off busy doing something and you do something else, if you have 
your phone with you or a hand-held device, it will sync where you left off on that 
device and you can just pick up where you left off. There's a real convenience 
factor to this. I can vouch for the content because it's my content. [laughs] But 
this is a great way to break into Mobile Ed. I get a lot of questions about how 
people can learn more and whether I can recommend a book... I can do that, but 
why not take courses from professors all over—not just the U.S, but all over the 
world.  
 
Mobile Ed right now has close to, I think it's 150 courses. You get Darrell Bock... I 
was actually with Darrell a couple weeks ago. He was here to give us another 
course. He's got a half-dozen courses in here. Craig Evans, Mark Futato... It's all 
fields. It's not just theology and Biblical Studies and Church History, but we have 
Counseling, we have Pastoral Leadership Courses... There's just a huge amount 
of content that people can get, and it's very convenient. It is mobile. It's truly 
mobile. It's what they're doing in their classrooms. I used to be in charge of 
inviting people to give us their content and it's like, "Look, we want you to come 
in here and do exactly what you do in class, except you won't have to talk about 
assignments that are missed, you won't have to review instructions, you won't 
have to grade anything, you don't have to talk about the football game... You just 
go through your material." And that's what we want. So you actually get what 
these professors are teaching at colleges and seminaries and universities all 
over the world, right there on your desktop and really, any device. It's a great 
deal. So this is a good way to break into it. 
 
TS: And again, that's almost half off. That's 40% off the course today 
at www.logos.com/nakedbiblepodcast. Go get Mike's Jewish Trinity Course now for 
40% off. And we thank them again for supporting us. Please go support them by 
supporting us and go get that course.  
 
5:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
3 
MH: Yeah, it's a great deal. That's a significant discount. It's a good deal. 
 
TS: All right, Mike. Well, good deal. Back into chapter 1! Wrapping up chapter 1 
of Hebrews. 
 
MH: Yep. Hebrews 1:5-14. True confessions here... I'm going to basically camp 
on certain parts of the passage. The parts are going to be verses 5-9. I will say a 
little bit about verse 13 in sort of a little bonus section at the end. Then in verse 
14, there's this comment about angels being ministering spirits. I'm not going to 
say too much about that. We might pick up some angel-talk when we get into 
chapter 2 (in fact I know we will, obviously). But for today it's going to be 5-14, 
but really mostly 5-9 is where we're going to spend our time here. 
 
If you're new to the format, this is what we do. We don't do a verse-by-verse 
exposition of everything. We do just sort of what's interesting and what I think 
sort of needs some commentary either for apologetic reasons or exegetical 
reasons or theological reasons. That's how we do it. 
 
So let's jump in here to verse 5. We'll just take it as it comes. I'm not going to 
read through the whole passage because we do have a good bit to cover here, 
as you can imagine. I've already alluded to this little bonus round at the end. But 
verse 5 says: 
 
5 For to which of the angels did God ever say, 
“You are my Son, 
    today I have begotten you”? 
Or again, 
“I will be to him a father, 
    and he shall be to me a son”? 
 
If you have not listened to the previous episode, you really need to before you 
jump in here. We made the point that one particular son was considered eligible 
for the status of co-ownership/co-possession/co-sharing of "all things" and then 
the name of God—the special name that is above all names. We talked about 
how the first four verses indicate the eternality of this son that distinguishes this 
particular son from all other heavenly sons of God—all other members of the 
heavenly host and, frankly, all people and all things in heaven and on earth. This 
particular son is distinct, and those distinctions make him worthy of this status of 
being co-regent/co-possessor/co-sharer with God himself. After introducing those 
thoughts and associating the son with Wisdom, which is an eternal attribute of 
God and is cast as an independent person in the Old Testament, he says "he is 
the radiance of the glory of God" and "he is the apaugasma" (a very rare term in 
the Old Testament, it occurs here and only one other place in the Septuagint). So 
we know what's going on there with that. He's the exact imprint of his nature—the 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
4 
hypostasis. He is the essence, the intrinsic reality of the Father. After going 
through all that, then he says, "Okay, as if I haven't made the point already, let's 
compare in other ways this particular son to these other heavenly beings." 
 
5 For to which of the angels did God ever say, 
“You are my Son, 
    today I have begotten you”? 
Or again, 
“I will be to him a father, 
    and he shall be to me a son”? 
 
Now, right away we look at this as moderns and we think father/son and we 
think, "One's the father and one's the son, and that means one produced the 
other or one begat the other." We have this language of "begotten" and we tend 
to have certain things in our heads when we see these terms, and we read them 
into the passage. That's who we are—we're modern. But there's just a lot more 
going into it because, frankly, God did say this to other angels if it means "I'm 
your creator." When you go back to the Old Testament, the Old Testament has a 
heavenly host. They're called "sons of God." There are passages that talk about 
God creating all the celestial beings—all things in heaven and earth. God did 
say, "You are the one I have begotten." So this isn't unique. Just that much 
should alert us to the fact that there's probably something else going on here 
besides creation and chronology. And there is. There are a number of ways to 
establish that.  
 
I'm going to break this down into essentially three things: 
 
1. There's Old Testament usage of the term "firstborn." In verse 6 and again 
when he brings the firstborn into the world, he says "Let all God's angels 
worship him." Consider verses 5 and 6 here in tandem, and then we're 
going to spend a little more time on verse 5. We look at this and we think 
chronology and point of origin, and it's really not something you can say 
because God says that to other members of the heavenly host. That's 
clear in Old Testament theology. We have to ask, "Well how is 'firstborn' 
used in the Old Testament? Is it ever used anywhere else?" Yeah, it is. 
We'll talk about that. 
 
2. We have New Testament usage of the term "firstborn." That's going to be 
something we have to think about.  
 
3. And then I'm also going to make a point about grammar in one respect—
one of these passages. 
 
1. Old Testament 
10:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
5 
 
Let me just give you one instance here where "firstborn" is used. In your head, 
you tell me what the problem is for point-of-origin and chronology. Because that's 
how Jehovah's witnesses want to take this verse and use it to say that Jesus 
wasn't eternal and he was created at one point and he was the first thing God 
created and that's why he's unique and elevated, but he's still created... blah, 
blah, blah.  
 
Exodus 4:22 has Moses in front of Pharaoh demanding that Pharaoh let the 
people go because this is what God told him to demand. God is instructing 
Moses what to say. 
 
22 Then you shall say to Pharaoh, ‘Thus says the LORD, Israel is my firstborn son… 
 
Here's the question: Is that true? "Well, of course it's true, Mike, Israel's the son 
of God just like... ah… Adam!" The firstborn son of God is not the one he 
produced from Abraham. It's not Isaac. It's not the nation. God's firstborn human 
creation is actually Adam. So this can't... "But wait a minute, Mike, it says 
'firstborn!' Firstborn has to mean the first thing created. It has to be 
chronologically prior!" No, actually, it doesn't. Calling Israel "my firstborn son," 
frankly, demonstrates that pretty clearly. Israel is not either individually (with 
Isaac, the first child of Abraham and Sarah) nor collectively the first human 
beings God is responsible for. It just isn't. So that significantly undermines this 
whole chronological approach to this term: firstborn. Try to fix this in your mind: 
Firstborn refers to a special status. It doesn't refer to chronological priority or 
original point of origin. Now, it can in other contexts, but here's the point: don't 
get misled (by either the Jehovah's Witnesses or somebody else) into thinking 
the term necessarily is about chronology and initial/original point of origin. It's not. 
It's not necessarily about those things. If you look at Exodus 4:22, that just can't 
be in the picture. The meaning of this term actually transcends this chronological 
stuff. It refers to a specific status. That's what we need to fix in our minds. 
 
2. New Testament 
 
Let's go to the New Testament. "Firstborn" appears in Paul's epistles three times. 
We have this one in Hebrews (we don't know if Paul wrote Hebrews, and I would 
say he didn't). But in Paul, he uses this term three places. First, Colossians 1:15: 
 
15 He [Jesus] is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.  
 
Then you’ve got Colossians 1:18, which says (still talking about Jesus). 
 
 18 And he is the head of the body, the church. He is the beginning, the firstborn 
from the dead, that in everything he might be preeminent. 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
6 
 
Thirdly, you have Romans 8:29:  
 
29 For those whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the 
image of his Son, in order that he might be the firstborn among many brothers. 
 
"Firstborn among many brothers"... Look at the three references: 
 
 Firstborn of creation 
 Firstborn of the dead 
 Firstborn among many brothers 
 
You look at the first one and think, "Maybe that's chronological... that means 
Jesus is the first thing God created." Chronological priority. And then we look at 
the second one and say, "Jesus was the first one to be raised from the dead," 
even though you could obviously debate that. Just go with it for now. What does 
"firstborn among many brothers" mean? It can't mean that he's the first human 
that would be glorified because you've got lots of other believers... In other 
words, you're going to try to argue some chronological priority. "He's the first one, 
the initiator... ah, there we go. We've got chronological priority now." Again, this 
is how people are going to think about these terms.  
 
I like Hawthorne's little summary here: 
 
The English word firstborn is misleading for it normally suggests someone who is 
born and therefore created. But this cannot be the significance of the term [in 
Colossians] since the immediately following words… 
 
A Jehovah's Witness is going to show you the reference here to verse 15, but will 
they show you what follows in verse 16? Hawthorne says this creation can't be 
chronological because of what follows in verse 16. 
 
But this cannot be the significance of the term here since the immediately 
following words (Col 1:16, beginning with hoti, “because”), which provide a 
commentary on the title, emphasize the point that he is the one by whom the 
whole creation came into being. There are no exceptions, for absolutely 
everything in creation has been made by him.  
 
Did you catch the point? Listen to the verse. This is Colossians 1:15, and we’ll 
keep going: 
 
15 He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation. 16 For by him 
all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, 
15:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
7 
whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities—all things were 
created through him and for him. 17 And he is before all things, and in him all 
things hold together.  
 
Here's the question: How can Jesus be the source of all creation and be created? 
Isn't he, as a created being, included in "all creation?" If he is! Then he can't have 
been created. It implodes. The thought implodes on itself. Either the text means 
"all creation" or it doesn't. "Oh, it means all the rest of creation!" No, that's not 
what the text says! It says he is the firstborn of all creation and by him all things 
were created in heaven and earth, visible and… It’s all-encompassing. It’s 
everything. 
 
So how can you have... It's like having the creator created before there was 
creation. It implodes on itself. Typically, people like the Jehovah's Witnesses will 
show you verse 15, but they won't show you verse 16 because you might think 
about it. [laughs] It's either all creation or it's not, and if Jesus is part of that 
creation, he had to be around to produce all that creation. He couldn't be 
uncreated. If you get them into a conversation, this where you say, "Maybe he's 
an uncreated creator!" "Oh yeah, that helps. That solves the problem." Yeah, that 
does solve the problem. And if he's uncreated, then he's God. Again, the whole 
idea just implodes on itself. 
 
Again, "firstborn," even in that passage—"firstborn of all creation"—doesn't really 
work to establish a beginning point for Jesus. I guess with "firstborn of the dead" 
you could argue what that means in a resurrective sense. There are obviously 
unique qualities about the resurrection of Christ because in one passage in the 
Gospels, he takes up his own life—that sort of thing. There are unique things 
about that. So I don't want to minimize that. But the question is, must the term 
"firstborn" imply some chronological priority? Maybe it implies some qualitative 
priority or some qualitative point of uniqueness or some status uniqueness. 
Maybe that's the better way to say it.  
 
3. Grammatical Issue 
 
If you go to Colossians 1, you have "firstborn of all creation." If you have a 
reverse interlinear (Logos Bible Software makes this easy because all the words 
are linked by hand to the original Greek and Hebrew) and you clicked on the 
word "of" in "firstborn of all creation" you would notice that there's no Greek word 
there for "of." It's just supplied by the translator. 
 
If you've taken a little Greek, this is going to be familiar. What we have here is 
two nouns next to each other (actually an adjective and a noun) and they're 
genitive. So we have sort of a chain relationship. We've got a nominative noun, a 
genitive adjective, and a genitive noun. We've got a little genitive chain here. You 
say, "Well, thanks for the grammar lesson, that really helps." Well, it actually 
20:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
8 
does help here, because what a genitive does is it creates this X of Y 
relationship—the relationship of one noun to the other. Here we have "firstborn" 
and then "creation." Those are the two nouns. What's the relationship between 
those two nouns? Well, if you put the word "of" in the middle like English 
translators do, it makes it sound like the first noun (firstborn) is produced by the 
second or is part of the second, which is a set produced/created. "Firstborn of 
creation"—that's the way it sounds to our ear in English. The problem is, you 
actually don't have a word there. So the relationship of the two nouns is open to 
interpretation.  
 
If you go to verse 18—"firstborn from the dead"—you don't have this ambiguity. 
You have a preposition (ek)—"firstborn from the dead." And if you go to the one 
in Romans, you have a preposition there. So this is the only one of the three that 
has this ambiguous relationship—"firstborn of all creation." If you're interested in 
Greek grammar and you've had at least one year, then you could handle 
something like Wallace's second-year grammar. But he talks about the genitive 
at length. I don't want to say "mind-numbing detail" because if you like languages 
it's just awesome stuff. But it's very detailed. He talks about the genitive 
relationships, and there are 15 or 20 just from possible semantic relationships 
between two nouns when you have a genitive. One of them is called the "genitive 
of subordination." I'm just going to read you what Wallace says here: 
 
The genitive substantive specifies that which is subordinated to or under the 
dominion of the head noun. Instead of of supply the gloss over or something like 
it that suggests dominion or priority. 
 
So you could very well translate (and, frankly, I would say this makes a whole lot 
of sense and you should) "firstborn of all creation" as "firstborn over all creation." 
That takes the chronology out of it and it assigns a special status to "firstborn." 
What I just did is legitimate because we don't have a preposition there. We have 
two nouns in a genitive relationship. The head noun is "firstborn" and the genitive 
is "creation." This is what exegesis is. You have to determine these relationships 
according to the rules of grammar, and that is a distinct possibility and I would 
say it makes a whole lot of sense. 
 
Back to the problem, if you just look at verse 15 you can think, "Maybe there's a 
point of origin here." If you look at 16, well... if it's all creation, how could he be 
part of that creation and yet produce all creation? It doesn't make any sense. It 
implodes. So the general point being made here about the firstborn language is 
(going back to the whole subject matter of the passage here in verses 5 and 6), 
don't get tripped up by this "firstborn" language. It is not inconsistent with what 
we read earlier in the first four verses, where this particular son is identified with 
God because he's identified with God's true essence—what he is in reality and 
also his eternal attribute of wisdom. He's eternal; he's not created. This "firstborn" 
language is not overturning that because "firstborn" refers to a status. It does not, 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
9 
of necessity, refer to point of origin or chronological precedence. It can be kind of 
misleading. 
 
The whole point, again, of this language is to contrast this particular son with the 
angels. "For to which of the angels did God ever say..." This is what the writer is 
going to try to do—contrast this particular son of the first four verses with all the 
other angels. He says in verse 6, "when he brings the firstborn into the world"... If 
you go back to the wisdom stuff that we talked about last week, he "brings forth 
wisdom." Wisdom is the co-creator. Very naturally, all the other angels are going 
to worship him because he is superior. He has this equal status. He is the 
hypostasis of the deity—of God himself. He is superior. Which of the other 
angels—the other sons of God—did God ever say this about? Well, the answer, 
of course, is none. 
 
Let's go back just to this situation. When you get into verses 5 and 6, and you 
can probably tell if you have a contemporary translation, you're going to have 
some of these statements... "you are my son, today I have begotten you," "I will 
be to him a father, he will be to me a son," "let all the angels worship him." You're 
going to have all of that stuff indented or set off because these are quotations 
from the Old Testament. English Bibles have a stylistic way of indicating that. 
You have a string here of Old Testament quotations that are really kind of 
interesting.  
 
The question, again, is rhetorical: "For which of the angels did God ever say this 
to?" Of course, the answer is "none." There's a rhetorical factor here. But he's 
going to go into a bunch of these Old Testament passages and talk about how 
this particular son is superior—how this particular son is characterized in some 
way as qualitatively different… categorized in some way, and the Old Testament 
passages that he quotes tend to support that.  
 
We'll just take the first two verses: 
 
“You are my Son, 
    today I have begotten you”? 
Or again, 
“I will be to him a father, 
    and he shall be to me a son”? 
 
Having declared in verse 4 that this exalted son—this particular son—received a 
more excellent name than the angels. Again, you have these links to eternality. 
The writer identifies the name as my son. Before it was a son. We talked about 
that last time—one particular son. Now it's my son. So there's a bit of a title thing 
going on here, because he's going to quote the second of these quotations: 
 
25:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
10 
“I will be to him a father, 
    and he shall be to me a son”? 
 
He's going to quote 2 Samuel 7—the Davidic Covenant. There's a bit of a 
particularizing in this citation. Verses 5 and 6, though, together he actually quotes 
two passages from the Old Testament: Psalm 2:7 and then the one I just 
mentioned, 2 Samuel 7:14. Both are familiar messianic texts. The first one is 
about ruling the nations with a rod of iron, and then you've got this Davidic 
Covenant passage in 2 Samuel 7. So this is familiar messianic territory. 
 
Lane, in his Hebrews commentary, writes this: 
 
There is a certain degree of unresolved tension in the writer’s designation of Jesus 
as Son, since the title can be applied to the pre-existent Son (v 3a–b),  
to the incarnate Son (v 2a, where the use may be proleptic), and to the exalted 
Son.  
 
What Lane is saying here is you can use this sonship language of Jesus in three 
different contexts—pre-existence, his existence as a man, and then his exaltation 
later on after the cross—after the resurrection and ascension. Continuing with 
Lane: 
 
It was apparently the writer’s conviction that although Jesus was the pre-existent 
Son of God (cf. 5:8, καίπερ ὢν υἱός, “although he was the Son”), he entered into a 
new dimension in the experience of sonship by virtue of his incarnation, his 
sacrificial death, and his subsequent exaltation. 
 
What he's saying here is that this sonship language applied to Jesus (the 
particular son)... We need to think of sonship in different aspects, not just 
creation and chronological priority. The same language can be used of Jesus at 
three different stages—who he was and then who he is and who he will be. You 
can still use the same language. Lane is just pointing out that we have to think 
about the elasticity of the language and not just go in one direction again, like 
those who want to see Jesus as a created being. 
 
Back to the two quotations: Psalm 2:7 and 2 Samuel 7:14. I'll focus a little bit on 
Psalm 2 in a moment for some Divine Council implications. That's going to be our 
little tack-on at the end, especially the Deuteronomy 32 Worldview. There's 
something going on in Psalm 2 that if you're familiar with the Deuteronomy 32 
Worldview, there's something there that's going to jump out at you. But we'll save 
that until the end. 
 
Here in this context, some take the first statement as indicating Jesus was a 
created being, by virtue of the word "begotten."  

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
11 
 
5 For to which of the angels did God ever say, 
“You are my Son, 
    today I have begotten you”? 
 
Some take that as indicating Jesus was created or that Jesus became the son of 
God when adopted by God. Usually that's put at his baptism, when the voice of 
God from heaven says, "This is my beloved son..." So some people say this 
either means that Jesus was created or that he was adopted by God. But a few 
things are conveniently forgotten by those who would take either this creation 
idea or the adoptionist view of Christology. Do we realize that Psalm 2:7... 
 
The LORD said to me, “You are my Son; 
    today I have begotten you. 
 
... is quoted in other passages besides Hebrews 1:5? Believe it or not, that Psalm 
actually gets quoted in other places. Those other places defy a connection 
between the word "begotten" and either a creation moment or an adoption at 
Jesus' baptism. Let me try to illustrate what I mean here. Let's go to Acts 13:33 
(beginning at verse 29). This is when Paul is explaining his ministry to the 
Gentiles to the Jerusalem church. This is Acts 13. It's at the beginning of Paul's 
ministry, and they want an explanation of what this crazy guy is doing preaching 
to Gentiles. If you go to verse 29, it says this: 
 
29 And when they had carried out all that was written of him, they took him 
down from the tree and laid him in a tomb. 30 But God raised him from the 
dead,31 and for many days he appeared to those who had come up with 
him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses to the people. 32 And 
we bring you the good news that what God promised to the fathers, 33 this he 
has fulfilled to us their children by raising Jesus, as also it is written in the 
second Psalm, 
“‘You are my Son, 
    today I have begotten you.’ 
 
Paul continues: 
 
34 And as for the fact that he raised him from the dead, no more to return to 
corruption, he has spoken in this way, 
“‘I will give you the holy and sure blessings of David.’ 
35 Therefore he says also in another psalm, 
“‘You will not let your Holy One see corruption.’ 
30:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
12 
 
What do we have here? Did you notice that in that passage the phrase "today I 
have begotten you" refers to the resurrection event. So it can't be talking about 
the creation of Jesus. It can't be talking about a creation of the second person of 
the Trinity or even the birth of Jesus. It has nothing to do with the point of origin 
of the second person of the Trinity or another divine being or a point of origin of 
Jesus himself. Why? Because the phrase is specifically applied to the moment of 
resurrection—to the event of the resurrection. It's specifically connected to that 
event. The point, therefore, is that this phrase is not about chronology. In 
theory—let's just wonder a little bit because this is going to come back up here—
it could be connected to kingship because the resurrection is required for the 
ascension (when Jesus ascends and sits down at the right hand of the Father). 
So there's probably a connection to kingship. This phrase "you are my son, today 
I have begotten you" has nothing to do with his origin. Even if he says it to David, 
it's not talking about David's point of origin. It's not even talking about Jesus' 
selection to be king. Here in Acts 13, it's talking about the resurrection! This just 
defies the way somebody like a Jehovah's Witness would use the phrase.  
 
Let's look elsewhere in the Bible where the phrase is actually used. Here's 
another one. This one is actually from the book of Hebrews itself. It's a little later 
in the book—Hebrews 5:5. We'll go back in verse 1. This is the Melchizedek 
passage. It says this: 
 
For every high priest chosen from among men is appointed to act on behalf of 
men in relation to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins. 2 He can deal gently 
with the ignorant and wayward, since he himself is beset with 
weakness. 3 Because of this [the high priest of Israel] is obligated to offer 
sacrifice for his own sins just as he does for those of the people. 4 And no one 
takes this honor for himself, but only when called by God, just as Aaron was. 
 
5 So also Christ did not exalt himself to be made a high priest, but was 
appointed by him who said to him, 
“You are my Son, 
    today I have begotten you”; 
6 as he says also in another place, 
“You are a priest forever, 
    after the order of Melchizedek.” 
 
7 In the days of his flesh, Jesus offered up prayers and 
supplications, with loud cries and tears, to him who was able to save 
him from death, and he was heard because of his 
35:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
13 
reverence. 8 Although he was a son, he learned obedience through what 
he suffered. 9 And being made perfect, he became the source of eternal 
salvation to all who obey him,10 being designated by God a high 
priest after the order of Melchizedek.  
 
We'll leave Hebrews 5 here. The phrase "you are my son, today I have begotten 
you" isn't connected to any creation point. It isn't connected to any beginning 
point for a divine being or for Jesus himself. It's not even connected to the 
resurrection, like it was in Acts 13. It's connected to Christ's appointment and his 
function as the great high priest after the order of Melchizedek, which itself is 
connected to being the sacrifice for sin. In other words, the phrase is connected 
with becoming the source of eternal salvation. It just has nothing to do with Jesus 
being a created being. Here it goes to the high priest and him being a sacrifice. In 
Acts 13 it was the resurrection. 
 
Just one little side-note here, going back to Hebrews 5... Hebrews 5:8 says: 
 
8 Although he was a son, he learned obedience through what he suffered. 
 
Jesus was already a son before the utterance of the phrase "you are my son, 
today I have begotten you." The phrase is not about chronology. It's not about 
chronology. Jesus was already a son before we ever get to the point of him 
offering himself as a sacrifice of sins (like Hebrews 5 connects those two 
thoughts). And you have to look at these phrases in the ways they're used 
elsewhere in the New Testament. And in the Old Testament you get the same 
phrases, as well. You can't just pull one out. Again, this is what cultists do, it's 
what a Unitarian is going to do, whatever. This is how it's done. You lift out one of 
these and then you argue the point based on the one that you're focused on. The 
usage of the same phrase in other places shows that this use—that tactical 
utilization of the phrase to make one particular point—is not legitimate. You've 
got to see how the New Testament writers understand these things.  
 
I would say, based on these usages (this variety), that anyone who would 
connect the phrase "today I have begotten you" with the origin of Jesus—as 
though he was not pre-existent—is simply guilty of ignoring the scriptural use of 
the phrase. It's pretty much that simple. The same goes for adoption as 
Christology. None of these uses are connected to the baptism of Jesus. Did you 
notice that? None of these uses are connected to the baptism. To argue 
adoptionism from the phrase "you're my son, today I have begotten you," you 
would need to argue that God adopted Jesus as his son at the cross or at the 
resurrection, because that's where the phrases are used. You'd have to argue 
that God adopted Jesus as his son at the cross or at the resurrection. But you 
know that's absurd. How do we know that? Because Jesus is referred to as the 
Son of God many times in the Gospels before either of those events. It just 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
14 
doesn't work. So you're either going to take the phrase in the context in which it's 
used, or you're not.  
 
Just because we make these points doesn't mean people aren't going to do it. 
They are going to do it! They're going to do it every day. You're going to see it on 
Facebook. You're going to see it all over the place—all over the web. You're 
going to run into people at work. You'll get into a religious discussion and you'll 
find someone who rejects the eternality or the pre-existence or the deity of Christ. 
This is what you're going to get, if they're taught. This is what you're going to get. 
Next time you get it ask, "You know that phrase, 'you are my son, today I have 
begotten you' that we're talking about? Where are the other two passages that 
it's used?" I'll bet they don't know!  
 
I'm going to offer a simple suggestion here in light of this. We're just camping 
here on verse 5. Both of the places where it is used—associated with 
appointment as the high priest after the order of Melchizedek and then the 
resurrection—both of those are connected to kingship, if you really think about it. 
Ask yourself, "When did Jesus become king?" When did he (to quote the context 
of Hebrews 1:3-6) become king? When did he "sit down at the right hand of 
majesty (1:3)? He did so after he offered himself as a sacrifice. He did so after he 
was raised from the dead. Jesus became king when he rose from the dead and 
ascended to the throne of the right hand of God. You say, "So what? Acts 13:33, 
Hebrews 5:5 describe this chain of events. One of the passages is about him 
offering himself as a sacrifice for sin and the other is about the resurrection." 
Well, I'm going to suggest that the phrase "you are my son, today I have 
begotten you" describes the inauguration of Jesus' kingship. It doesn't describe 
his creation. It doesn't describe his baptism. It doesn't describe his adoption. It 
describes the inauguration of his kingship. That's why it's associated with him 
offering himself as a sacrifice for sin, and it's why it's associated with the 
resurrection. You need both of those things to happen before Jesus can ascend 
to the throne at the right hand of the Majesty on High.  
 
In that light, it just makes good sense to have the phrase occur here in 
Hebrews—right after Hebrews 1:3! Hebrews 1:3 is about ascending to the right 
hand of the Majesty on High. So when we're thinking about Jesus becoming king 
and then you throw in this phrase ("you're my son, today I've begotten you"), and 
then what does he quote right after that? "I will be to him a father and he shall be 
to me a son." Where does that come from? 2 Samuel 7—the Davidic covenant—
which is about kingship. It's very consistent. It's coherent. It's logical. All of these 
things have a context. So again, I'd suggest that "you are my son, today I have 
begotten you" means... This is Mike's Expanded Paraphrase here. It means: 
"You have now taken rule of all things. With me. You have now taken rule, you're 
now co-possessor. You've gone through the incarnation, you offered yourself, 
you rose from the dead. Now come back home and sit here at my right hand. 
You are the rightful and only son who is eligible to co-possess and co-share all 
things with me and to have my name. You have now taken rule of all things with 
40:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
15 
me, your father. And I'm not being displaced! (God isn't going anywhere. It's not a 
succession plan.) You have taken possession of your inheritance. Rule over all 
things with me. When you died, when you rose again and ascended to the 
throne, now we will rule together as father and son." That's what the phrase 
means. 
 
And look at what follows. Before we get into verse 8, I want to say one other little 
thing here. This isn't the bonus round at the end, but I can't let this go. Just real 
quickly, in verse 6 when he says: 
 
6 And again, when he brings the firstborn into the world, he says, 
“Let all God's angels worship him.” 
 
Do you know where that comes from? If you have the ESV and you look at the 
cross-reference there, it will say it's cited from Deuteronomy 32:43. And in the 
ESV it'll say "in the Greek text." You know where else it comes from? It comes 
from the Dead Sea Scrolls. Deuteronomy 32:43, which along with Deuteronomy 
32:8... 
 
 8When the Most High gave to the nations their inheritance, 
    when he divided mankind, 
he fixed the borders of the peoples 
    according to the number of the sons of God. 
 
...these are the two places (32:8 and 32:43) where the Dead Sea Scrolls has the 
demonstrable original text. What am I saying? I'm saying that the writer of 
Hebrews had access to that text. He quoted not just the Greek (the Greek follows 
the Dead Sea Scrolls here and actually expands a little bit on it), but the writer of 
Hebrews had access to that Deuteronomy 32 text that some people that you 
know, when you try to talk to them about the Deuteronomy 32 Worldview and 
Divine Council stuff, they say, "That's not what my Bible says in verse 8!" You 
know what? The writer of Hebrews didn't have your Bible [laughs]! He had 
Deuteronomy 32 according to the reading at Qumran. This is a great verse, as 
well... I hate to be recommending stuff like this, but I can't resist. This is a great 
verse for King-James-only people because they don't have this verse back in 
their Old Testament—Deuteronomy 32. So, like, he's quoting vapor! "Where did 
he get the quotation?" Well, it's not back in your King James in Deuteronomy 32, 
I can tell you that. Because the King James in the Old Testament was done using 
the Masoretic Text—what they had at their disposal at the time. I guess if you're 
in a needling/cajoling mood with a King James only person, you throw out 
Hebrews 1:6. But let's just move on. I don't want to spend too much time on stuff 
like that, but it is interesting. 
 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
16 
To back up a little bit (I just couldn't resist throwing that in here), the meaning of 
the phrase "you're my son, today I have begotten you" is that you have now 
taken rule of all things with me, your father. You've taken possession of your 
inheritance. You're going to rule over all things with me. We're going to rule as 
father and son. Now, if you look at what follows in verse 8: 
 
8 But of the Son he says,  
“Your throne, O God, is forever and ever, 
    the scepter of uprightness is the scepter of your kingdom. 
9 You have loved righteousness and hated wickedness; 
therefore God, your God, has anointed you 
    with the oil of gladness beyond your companions.” 
 
In verse 10, he’ll address the Son as God—as Lord: 
 
10 And, 
“You, Lord, laid the foundation of the earth in the beginning, 
    and the heavens are the work of your hands; 
11 they will perish, but you remain; 
    they will all wear out like a garment, 
12 like a robe you will roll them up, 
    like a garment they will be changed. 
But you are the same, 
    and your years will have no end.” 
 
Why can he say these things? You know why he can say these things? Because 
of what we talked about last week. Because this particular son has been 
identified as the Wisdom of God—the attribute of God that must be eternal 
because you can't have a dumb deity. You can't have a time when God is 
hopelessly ignorant—especially before creation or it wouldn't have happened! He 
has identified this particular son with God. He is the apaugasma. He has the 
wisdom attribute—the wisdom description. He has referred to the Son as the 
hypostasis of God himself—God's essence, what he is in reality. And if you do 
that, you can say stuff like this. You can look at the Son and say, "Your throne, O 
God, is forever and ever. You, Lord, laid the foundation of the earth." Well, of 
course! He was the agent of creation because he is Wisdom (Proverbs 8). You 
have to have the Old Testament context to pick some of these things out and to 
kind of make sense of what they're doing. There's just a lot here. Verse 13: 
 
13 And to which of the angels has he ever said, 
45:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
17 
“Sit at my right hand 
    until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet”? 
14 Are they not all ministering spirits… 
 
In other words, the angels have a lesser role. He never said to any of the angels, 
"Hey, sit here at my right hand. You're the co-possessor of all things. You're the 
co-ruler." Instead, the angels have a lesser role.  
 
14 Are they not all ministering spirits sent out to serve for the sake of those who 
are to inherit salvation? 
 
Now, isn't that interesting? I don't want to get too far ahead (we're going to hit it in 
Hebrews 2). But think about this: You've got the other sons of God, you've got 
the other members of the heavenly host there. None of them qualify because 
they're not God. None of them qualify for this special status of being the co-
possessor/co-ruler and all these things. They're assigned a lesser role. Who are 
they serving? They're serving you and me—they're serving believers. What is the 
believer's destiny? The believer's destiny is to rule with Christ! They're actually 
serving us—who will, in the end, be exalted above them. That's what you've got 
going here. You're going to get a fuller description of it in Hebrews 2. In Hebrews 
1, not only is this particular son superior to all the angels, but you and I are going 
to have a status because of being united to that particular son, where we are all 
at this elevated/higher level. Just think about that. We'll get into it more in 
Hebrews 2. If you've read Unseen Realm, you probably remember that chapter. 
But that's kind of an amazing theological statement to make there. 
 
I want to add another thought here. There are just a lot of things that pop into my 
head when it comes to this phrase, "you are my son, today I have begotten you." 
If we're going to follow this trajectory that I've suggested here, if this phrase is 
really about inheriting the throne of the Kingdom and taking possession of what 
belonged to God—that this is the rightful status of this particular son... That 
situation could only be enacted or realized after making himself a sacrifice for sin, 
rising again, and ascending to the Father (because that's where this phrase is 
used—Acts 13, Hebrews 5). If that's the case, I would say that kind of brings 
Philippians 2 into a sharper focus. You have the one was God and was given the 
name above all names after humbling himself in the incarnation. Just think of 
Philippians 2 and this whole "let this mind be in you that was also in Christ Jesus" 
and all that. You have him humbling himself in the incarnation, dying on the 
cross, rising again to take possession of the throne that belonged to him. So God 
the Son becomes a man, then he resumes his role as God the Son in his 
resurrected human body. That's just how the resurrection works. At no time did 
the Son lose the throne. At no time did he lose the name that he had before the 
foundation of the world. Rather, he surrendered the throne and acquiesced the 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
18 
limitations of the incarnation. Both of those were necessities to be the sacrifice 
for sin.  
 
And I'll add just a little rabbit-trail here... It was also necessary to fulfill the 
covenants. You've probably heard me say that before, but these things are 
necessary—this surrendering of all this—to be the sacrifice for sin. And that is 
key to redemption, and then you have the resurrection, the ascension... The 
whole thing is a working system. So this comparison in Hebrews 1 is not just idle 
theological talk. I especially like the connection in that last verse about the angels 
being ministering spirits sent out to serve for the sake of those who are to inherit 
salvation. That isn't all we're inheriting [laughs], if you really know the backdrop of 
the Council idea. But we're going to get into that more in chapter 2.  
 
As far as this little bonus thing I've hinted at a couple times, let's go back to 
Psalm 2. For those of you who have read Unseen Realm and/or you're familiar 
with the Divine Council Worldview, take that worldview that derives from 
Deuteronomy 32 and read Psalm 2 in light of that—and, of course, also in light of 
Psalm 82, which draws on Deuteronomy 32. There are things in the Psalm that 
really jump out. Just listen to what it says. I'm going to read a bunch of verses 
here.  
 
Why do the nations rage 
    and the peoples plot in vain? 
2 The kings of the earth set themselves, 
    and the rulers take counsel together, 
    against the LORD and against his Anointed, saying, 
3 “Let us burst their bonds apart 
    and cast away their cords from us.” 
 
Let's just stop there. "The nations." Who are the nations under dominion? Well, 
consider the sons of God from Deuteronomy 32. They're enslaved by the sons of 
God—Psalm 82.  
 
2 The kings of the earth set themselves, 
    and the rulers take counsel together… 
 
Are we talking about earthly rulers or supernatural rulers? Ultimately in the 
Psalm, you're actually talking about both. But typically, you only get a focus on 
the human ones. If you include the supernatural ones in here, look at the next 
verse: 
 
50:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
19 
[They] take counsel together, 
    against the LORD and against his Anointed [MH: Yahweh and his particular son 
that we’re talking about in Hebrews], saying, 
3 “Let us burst their bonds apart 
    and cast away their cords from us.” 
 
"We've got to get out from under those guys." It's this statement that they want 
their autonomy. They know that they themselves are under dominion—they're 
under a greater power. Look at verse 4 in Psalm 2: 
 
4 He who sits in the heavens laughs; 
    the Lord holds them in derision. 
5 Then he will speak to them in his wrath, 
    and terrify them in his fury, saying, 
6 “As for me, I have set my King 
    on Zion, my holy hill.” 
7 I will tell of the decree: 
The LORD said to me, “You are my Son; 
    today I have begotten you… 
 
There's the phrase! If it's associated with... what was it? Offering of himself as a 
sacrifice for sins (Hebrews 5); Acts 13 is the resurrection. God's response to this 
is to laugh, first of all, and basically say, "You're not getting out from under my 
authority at all. And in fact, here's my response: I've set my king on Zion, my holy 
hill. You are my son, today I have begotten you." In other words, they're not 
going to know what that means. We know what it means in hindsight because of 
books like Hebrews and books like Acts. We know what it means in hindsight, but 
basically it's sort of a cryptic way of saying, "You have no idea what's going to hit 
you. Instead of this release/autonomy you want, you have no idea of how you're 
going to be judged—both the degree and how it's going to work.” If you just read 
this without the New Testament, it's very earthly-oriented and seems to be just a 
bunch of random thoughts. But if you read it in hindsight, there's a lot here that 
really gets into this whole worldview. Verse 8: 
 
 
8 Ask of me, and I will make the nations your heritage… 
 
Christ is going to own the nations, and we're going to own the nations with him. 
Why? Because of this grafting in. We are the reconstitution of the Council. We're 
going to displace them.  
 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
20 
9 You shall break them… 
 
Instead of them breaking the bonds over them held by the greater authority, 
you—this king who is set on Zion, the "today I have begotten you son"... This 
whole phrase refers to the idea of the inauguration of kingship and the idea of 
kingship. "You"—the king... 
 
9 You shall break them with a rod of iron 
    and dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel. 
 
Where is similar phrasing used in the New Testament? It's Revelation 2:26. This 
is Jesus quoting a messianic Psalm of you and me: 
 
26 The one who conquers and who keeps my works until the end, to him I will 
give authority over the nations, 27 and he will rule them with a rod of iron, as 
when earthen pots are broken in pieces, even as I myself have received 
authority from my Father. 28 And I will give him the morning star. 
 
If you've read Unseen Realm, you know this stuff. "Morning star" is a reference to 
messianic authority. Look at what's going on here and read the Psalm in light of 
the fuller picture. Almost every verse has something really, really neat in it. Verse 
10 : 
 
10 Now therefore, O kings, be wise; 
    be warned, O rulers of the earth. 
11 Serve the LORD with fear… 
 
Let's see some change here! It's a little bit of a plea. On one hand, it's kind of an 
empty plea because of Psalm 82. They're not going to change. 
 
11 Serve the LORD with fear, 
    and rejoice with trembling. 
 
He doesn't extend an offer of redemption to them, but it's almost like, "You know 
what's coming, so don't make it any worse [laughing]! 
 
12 Kiss the Son, 
    lest he be angry, and you perish in the way, 
    for his wrath is quickly kindled. 
Blessed are all who take refuge in him. 
55:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
21 
 
You get this mixture of earthly rulers and heavenly rulers/figures and so on and 
so forth, but their fate is sealed—even though you have verses 10 and 11: "Hey, 
serve the Lord with fear and trembling." Their fate is sealed, though, because of 
verses 7 and 8. And verse 6. There is going to be a messiah, and he is going to 
be the son ("today I have begotten you") and that is going to mean offering 
himself as a sacrifice for sin, and that is going to mean the resurrection—all 
these things we've talked about. It's just a really, really interesting Psalm. 
 
As a way of wrapping this up in one more point, this is what we're familiar with in 
Old Testament theology: The nations are ruled by earthly kings (of course), 
referred to as "rulers." And they're also ruled by divine rulers (the sons of God to 
whom the nations were allotted, and vice-versa). Hence, the kings here could 
refer to either or both human or divine rulers. The Psalm is about more than the 
son of David seeing earthly kings under his footstool/authority. It's also about the 
gods of the nations being subdued by the son of David (messiah) and being 
broken under his reign. There is actually a similar situation to this in Ugaritic texts 
outside the Old Testament.  
 
I'm going to put this article in the folder for newsletter subscribers. It's a short 
article by Lowell Handy called "A Solution for Many Malkm." It's from an annual 
journal called Ugarit-Forschungen, 1988. You have the same thing happening in 
Ugaritic texts. In the divine realm, you have more than one king—more than one 
mlk, more than one melek. Handy's article does a nice job of showing that 
different members of the Divine Council were called "rulers." You have multiple 
rulers in Canaanite religion who are under the authority of the high god, El. They 
have geographical responsibilities and stuff like this. It's this terminology that 
doesn't just refer to earthly authorities, but it also refers to supernatural 
authorities. The same term is used for both, and in both situations. The article 
goes into the fact that, even in earthly bureaucracies you can have more than 
one person referred to by mlk/king. It just means "ruler"—somebody who has 
authority. Ultimately, there's a hierarchy—there's a highest authority and all that. 
But it's just an interesting article that shows that in the wider Semitic/Canaanite 
world, there's this concept about there being Yahweh, the Most High, and then 
underneath him you have these other rulers of the earth that are allotted to the 
nations. They ultimately go corrupt and want their autonomy, but as Psalm 2 
says, "You ain't gettin' that. Instead you're going to get judgment." 
 
That whole way of thinking is not contrived. It's something that someone in 
ancient Israel—an ancient Canaanite—would have been quite familiar with. It 
would have been just part of their worldview. But we miss that because we're 
modern. We don't have that stuff in the can, so to speak. We don't have it floating 
around in our heads.  
 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
22 
So that's our little bonus—some Divine Council stuff there, and I even threw in 
Hebrews 1:6 about Deuteronomy 32:43. But let's not miss the fuller point. Just to 
wrap up here, this language about "you're my son, today I have begotten you" 
has nothing to do with point of origin or chronology. This is a statement about 
inheriting the throne of God. And the only one eligible for that is the one who is 
eternal. He is wisdom. He is the essence of God. None of the other angels are. 
Again, a lot of what we talk about in Divine Council stuff and Unseen Realm 
really sort of comes to a head here. You can really see it jump out in Hebrews 
1—the difference between this particular son and all the other ones. And it's 
going to get even more dramatic when we drift into chapter 2. We've already 
gotten a whiff of it here—that the ministering spirits (those who are given a lesser 
role, the ones to whom the particular son is being compared) are actually 
assigned to help/serve human believers who will, in the end, have a superior 
position to them. Back to Paul's 1 Corinthians 6:3: 
 
3 Do you not know that we are to judge angels? How much more, then, matters 
pertaining to this life! 
 
Don't you know that you're going to rule over angels? You get a glimpse of it here 
in Hebrews 1. 
 
TS: And we wonder why some of them didn't like it and rebelled. [laughter] 
 
MH: Yeah. Is that such a mystery? But there's so much irony in verse 14. "All 
those other guys we've been talking about that aren't at the level of this one... We 
know what they do. They serve you guys!" And then in the next chapter it's like, 
"Hey, you guys are going to end up over them." It's just full of irony. 
 
TS: And I don't know how a layman, or anybody reading through Hebrews, is 
going to take away anything other than "begotten you"... 
 
MH: The real key is looking up where else the phrase occurs and noticing that it 
can't have anything to do with creation origin. 
 
TS: I'm going to bet that 99% of people do not do that.  
 
MH: I would imagine that's going to be on target. 
 
TS: Hence, the reason why you need to listen to the Naked Bible Podcast. 
 
MH: There you go. Good mini-infomercial there! 
 
TS: All right, Mike, we appreciate it. Looking forward to chapter 2 next week, 
correct? 
 
1:00:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                                                                 Episode 176: Hebrews 1:5-14 
 
23 
MH: Yep. I don't know how far we'll get, but we'll definitely get into chapter 2. 
 
TS: Sounds good. Again, we want to thank Faithlife for sponsoring the show and 
remind you to go get Mike's Jewish Trinity Mobile Ed course for 40% off right now 
at www.logos.com/nakedbiblepodcast. That's how you're going to get almost half off 
there. We encourage everyone to please go get it.  
 
With that, Mike, I just want to thank everybody for listening to the Naked Bible 
Podcast! God bless. 
 

---PAGE---
