Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
1 
Naked Bible Podcast Transcript 
Episode 331 
Q&A 39 
July 4, 2020 
 
Teacher: Dr. Michael S. Heiser (MH) 
Host: Trey Stricklin (TS) 
 
Episode Summary 
 
Dr. Heiser answers your questions: 
 
• Could Deuteronomy 32 refer to “sons of Israel” instead of “sons of God” 
based on God’s foreknowledge of how many there would be in the future? 
[Time stamp 5:00] 
• How few is “few” in Luke 13:22-30? [15:50] 
• If the ancient people were so wrong about what the physical world is like, 
how can I trust them when they describe what the supernatural world is 
like?  [18:05] 
• Why are the sons of God in Genesis 6 called angels in the New 
Testament? [20:05] 
• Does Psalm 8:5 (humans are “a little lower than the angels”) make the 
terms for angels and elohim interchangeable? [22:20] 
• How would an Israelite think about humans being a little lower than the 
heavenly beings in a divine council worldview? Is it more about location or 
about position?  [24:20] 
• Were Second Temple Jews concluding that there was something unique 
about Cain, based on Apocryphal writings that his skin glowed? [27:10] 
• Is Isaiah 43:3-4 intended to be a hyperlink to Deuteronomy 32 and 
Yahweh’s disinheritance of the nations? The term “Jeshrun” is used for 
Israel in both places. [32:40] 
   
 
Transcript 
 
TS: Welcome to the Naked Bible Podcast, Episode 331: Our 39th Q&A. I’m the 
layman, Trey Stricklin, and he’s the scholar, Dr. Michael Heiser. Hey, Mike! 
What’s going on? 
 
MH: Well, it’s hot here. [laughs]  
 
TS: Yeah? 
 
MH: Surprise, surprise. [laughs]  
 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
2 
TS: Yeah. And hot to you is…? 
 
MH: Well, I mean, I grew up in Pennsylvania, so you know… I know what 90s 
weather is and high humidity. But nobody else (other than my wife and myself) in 
the house has really experienced that. So it’s kind of like a thing that’s really 
noticeable to them. 
 
TS: Are they melting? Are they complaining? What’s going on? 
 
MH: No, my oldest (Amy) likes to go out and sit outside. Calvin hates it. Simi is 
sort of ambivalent. She can sort of take it or leave it. But Drenna likes it. She 
says in Florida it’s like being… She still feels like she’s on vacation every day. 
“Because it’s the sun. We went to a sunny place. We would only do that if we 
were on vacation,” if you’re in Washington State mode. So that’s what it feels like 
to her.  
 
TS: Well come talk to me when you hit triple digits. [MH laughs] Because 
Texas… 
 
MH: Yeah, we’ve seen that in New Mexico. Yeah, we’ve taken a couple of 
Roswell trips. But there it’s dry. I don't know what that’s going to be like when it’s 
100 here and it’s 90% humidity. I guess you just don’t go anywhere. 
 
TS: I wonder what the aliens feel about the hot weather in New Mexico. I bet they 
have a lot of sunscreen. 
 
MH: They just crashed. They didn’t really stick around. Or they can live 
underground in the underground base. 
 
TS: That’s probably why they crashed! It was so hot, their air conditioning went 
out, and they crashed. I guarantee you that’s what happened. 
 
MH: Yeah. Maybe we reverse-engineered their air conditioning to improve our 
own. 
 
TS: That’s exactly right. Get more efficient. We’re on to something, Mike! Think 
about it! 
 
MH: [laughs] That makes so much sense. [laughs]  
 
TS: You’re flying around in the sun, close to the sun, and all these stars… You’ve 
got to have good A/C! And then the reverse, you’ve got to have good heat when 
you’re out in the middle of the cold of empty space. You’ve got to have good 
heat. 
 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
3 
MH: Yeah, they perfected this. They perfected climate control. 
 
TS: Yeah, insulation. Perfect. That’s exactly… Probably that new foam spray that 
you can get in your house now: aliens. 
 
MH: Yeah, there you go. 
 
TS: I’m telling you. 
 
MH: Yeah, if it’s useful, we have to give them credit for it. I guess that’s how that 
works. 
 
TS: Yeah, there you go. Well, Mike, anything else? 
 
MH: I’ll be getting an email from Coast to Coast AM this week about being on the 
show, if somebody listens to this conversation. 
 
TS: I haven’t listened to Coast to Coast AM in a while. Have you? 
 
MH: No I haven’t. And I haven’t been on for probably three years. 
 
TS: You need to get on there for your Demons book. 
 
MH: Eh, I just… I don't know. George is just going to want to talk about ancient 
aliens. That’s… You know. It doesn’t matter what the topic is. Plus now that I’m 
on the East Coast, the show is, like, 2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. It’s like, “Do I really 
want to do that?”  
 
Well, with this scintillating introduction to our Q&A… [laughter] I’m sure people 
are really, “Let’s do the Q&A now, please!” 
 
TS: Yeah, absolutely. Well, I wish we had an alien question to start it off with, but 
we don’t. 
 
MH: No? Well. Are you sure? We can search through the archives for “alien”. 
You might find one. 
 
TS: That’s true. I can make one up. 
 
MH: I got them in Q&A at the Awakening School stuff. We tried to discourage 
that. But every once in a while, one would get through. You know? So it is what it 
is. 
 
TS: You’ve got to at least try. 
 
MH: Yep.  

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
4 
 
TS: Alright, well, let’s just jump in here. Our first question is from Vuyo from 
Butterworth, South Africa. I know I didn’t do your name justice. But Vuyo—that’s 
pretty neat—sent an email. There’s a small town called Butterworth in South 
Africa. That’s pretty neat. Alright. 
 
MH: Yeah. I wonder if Mrs. Butterworth… [laughs] Okay, I couldn’t resist that. 
You can edit that. If Mrs. Butterworth lives there. 
 
TS: Oh, yes! Butterworth. I got you. The syrup. I got you. 
 
MH: We can get rid of that… 
 
TS: [laughs] Okay. [MH laughs] Vuyo asks: 
 
I have a question concerning the Deuteronomy 32 cosmic geography 
worldview and its foundation being founded on the proper 
translation being "sons of God" as opposed to “sons of Israel.” I am 
more in favor of sons of God, it's more coherent and fits the mosaic 
of the story of the Bible, but your argument for that is my concern. I 
don't think it's incorrect. But is it not possible for God with his 
omniscience, with his foreknowledge to be able to foreknow the 
number of the sons of Israel and thus divide the nations according to 
that number and thus maybe have "Sons of Israel" as correct? How 
would you debunk that? 
 
MH: Well, there are several ways. First of all, God’s foreknowledge and 
omniscience has nothing to do with what the text actually says. There is no early 
textual evidence for “sons of Israel.” The oldest textual evidence we have (Dead 
Sea Scrolls) is “sons of God,” and whatever was behind the Septuagint, same 
thing. So none of that has anything to do with omniscience. The text is what it is 
(was what it was) regardless of that. So we can’t wonder about how we might 
approach an incorrect reading (or a reading that didn’t exist when the book was 
composed) in light of God’s attributes. It’s actually a nonsensical question in that 
regard. So… I’ll try to rephrase it so it’s more clear: our theological musings 
about something that wasn’t in the Bible to begin with doesn’t make a whole lot of 
sense. So that’s the first thing.  
 
Moving on from that point, there are a couple of things that could easily be said 
here. There were more than 70 children of Israel that went down to Egypt. Let’s 
just start there. The 70 in verses referring to that pilgrimage is not an actual 
number. It’s actually artificial. You say, “What do you mean by that?” Well, when 
we did the series on Exodus, we talked about Exodus 1:5 (and I’m going to read 
that). I’m reading from the ESV. 
 
5:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
5 
5 All the descendants of Jacob were seventy persons; Joseph was already in 
Egypt. 
 
So there you get the reference to the number 70. And when we talked about that 
in the podcast series on Exodus, I noted that “descendants,” which is literally 
“those who came out of (or out of the loins of) Jacob” — those who came out of 
Jacob… That language refers to Jacob’s direct seed (his sons and their children 
who were in direct lineal descent). So it doesn’t refer to other children who are 
outside who weren’t “in the loins of Jacob”. If you look at Genesis 46:26 in this 
regard… 
 
26 All the persons belonging to Jacob who came into Egypt, who were his own 
descendants [MH: that’s the same Hebrew term there… it’s יֹצְ אֵ י (yōtseʾê) — “to 
come out of”], not including Jacob's sons' wives, were sixty-six persons in all. 
 
You’ll actually get a different number there than the sons of Joseph. You can get 
to 70, which is what the passage does. But the key ideas there are, not including 
Jacob’s sons wives… So we have an issue here. There is some artificiality to the 
number 70. If you want to take the language strictly for what it says, it refers only 
to those descendants who directly came from Jacob. It doesn’t say anything 
about wives. The women aren’t included—so on and so forth. So it’s not a real 
number. The real number is going to be a bit larger.  
 
So have an indeterminate number. We don’t actually know how many there were 
in reality. Because even if you went back and looked at the names of the wives of 
the sons of Jacob, you’re going to find out that not all of them are listed. We don’t 
get the wives for all of the sons, and so on and so forth. We don’t get a lot of 
information about who’s actually “in Israel,” who actually makes the trip with 
Jacob.  
 
So the number is artificial. And that’s a problem for this, “Well, God knew 
omnisciently how many…” And the reason it’s a problem is because the other 
view (sons of God), which is the one that was actually in the text to begin with, 
we have a concrete number there. We had 70. Because all we need to do is 
count the known nations at the time in Genesis 10. Genesis 10 and 11 (the Babel 
incident from which the Deuteronomy 32 worldview springs)… Every biblical 
scholar who’s ever drawn a breath knows that those two chapters are related 
(the Table of Nations and the division of the nations—it’s very obvious). So we 
have an actual real number there. And if we wanted to drill down into the larger 
Canaanite worldview for polemic reasons, we would discover that the sons of El 
(the Canaanite El) at Ugarit were 70. These things aren’t just coincidental and 
accidental. But we don’t have a concrete number if we’re going with sons of 
Israel. Because we just don’t know how many went down to Egypt. The number 
that we’re given is artificial. It doesn’t include a lot of the womenfolk (and if you 
10:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
6 
wanted to be real picky there could be some other outliers there too). So you 
have a disconnect there.  
 
I would also say that the notion that maybe God in his omniscience knew that 
there would be 70 Israelites go down there (that’s the point), none of that has any 
coherence at all when you get to Deuteronomy 32:43. What I mean here is that 
the 70 Israelites being used to by some (not by Vuyo, but by some) to deny the 
“sons of God” reading in Deuteronomy 32:8, they forget about verse 43. Because 
the plural elohim of verse 43 was also eliminated at some point in what would 
become the Masoretic Text when verse 8 was [eliminated] (the reference to the 
sons of God). So how do 70 Israelites account for what we read in Deuteronomy 
32:43? Let me just read the passage. Because it’s the same passage—the same 
textual issue in both places. And I point this out in my articles. I don’t spend too 
much time on this in Unseen Realm. But in my journal articles I do. Verse 43 
says: 
 
43 “Rejoice with him, O heavens [MH: Or “O heavenly ones”]; 
    bow down to him, all gods [elohim], 
for he avenges the blood of his children 
    and takes vengeance on his adversaries. 
He repays those who hate him 
    and cleanses his people's land.” 
 
It’s a direct attack… It’s a Deuteronomy 32 attack on the gods that seduced the 
Israelites way back earlier in the chapter (32:8, 32:17). If you’re going to 
eliminate the supernatural element from verse 8, or say, “Well, that’s really a 
reference to the Israelites,” how is this a reference to the Israelites? How does it 
work in verse 43? And of course the answer is, “It doesn’t,” whereas the other 
view certainly does. And that would make sense, because verse 8 (the sons of 
God) and verse 43 (the plural elohim)… That’s what the text said. That’s what 
was in the text.  
 
I could also ask, “Well, you know, if we have sons of Israel here, then where 
does Daniel get his theology? You know, Daniel 10, the prince of Persia, prince 
of Greece, these supernatural princes that are opposing Israel’s prince, Michael 
(later called the archangel)… Where does Daniel get this notion that earthly 
empires…? Behind those empires there was a supernatural intelligence or power 
that was ultimately assigned to or attached to this geopolitical entity. Where does 
Daniel get that? Does he just make it up? It just pops into his head? No, he gets 
it from Deuteronomy 32 (the sons of God thing). If those are just humans, I don't 
know where Daniel’s getting his theology. You completely destroy the 
connection, which is actually important because when Paul quotes Deuteronomy 
32:17, he’s talking about other elohim (which the Septuagint has as demons). 
And that’s in verse 17. Where does Deuteronomy 32:17 get the idea? Well, it 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
7 
gets it from the preceding verse in verse 8. Again, this is all a coherent whole that 
only makes sense if it’s “sons of God.” And that’s good, because guess what? 
That’s what it was according to all of our most ancient textual evidence. That’s 
what it was. So you could also say, Well, “Daniel gets his theology from Psalm 
82.” Well, that’s wonderful. Where does the Psalmist get it, in verse 8 when he 
asks God to rise up and take the nations as his inheritance? “Well, I thought God 
owned everything.” Actually, it makes sense if you allot the nations to other sons 
of God. So where does the Psalmist get that idea if it was about Israelites? 
Again, you could make this idea (this trajectory) look dumb. [laughs] Okay? Let’s 
just be honest. And I know that’s not Vuyo’s trajectory. Because, in his question, 
he obviously understands the textual issue with the reading. But at the end of the 
day, omniscience has nothing to do with what was actually in the text. And to 
propose the alternative makes no sense at all for a number of these reasons. 
 
TS: Roy has a question about Luke 13:22-30: 
 
Just wondering Mike's take on "few" being saved.  Jesus doesn't 
actually say that few will be saved in this Luke passage, but there are 
a number of other passages that seem to imply or say that the 
"remnant" will be few (few will find it; workers are few; many called 
but few chosen; etc...).  And then the end of the Luke passage 
references the first being last and the last being first. 
 
So I guess what I'm wondering is, "how few is "few"? 
 
MH: [laughs] Well, the honest answer is, I have no idea! I can’t assign a number 
or some kind of quantity when that information isn’t given. I think the key, though, 
here is… Roy used the word remnant. The people of God are always a subset of 
the rest of humanity. And I think it’s quite clear they are a small subset. If you 
want to go back to our first question on the Deuteronomy 32 worldview… Hey, 
it’s one nation amid all the other ones. And even in that one nation, a lot of those 
people don’t even wind up to be believers. They wind up forsaking their loyalty to 
the God of Israel (to the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) and go chasing after 
some other gods. So even in that subset, there’s a subset. So it’s a small 
number, relatively speaking, to the whole. But I can’t quantify it in any other way 
than that. Remnant theology is something that runs through the entirety of the 
Bible (this subset idea).  
 
And I’ll throw out one other thought here. Since remnant theology does run 
through Scripture, it’s one of the reasons why I wonder about the general 
coherence of universalism. But that’s a different subject. But the pattern is always 
the opposite of universalism [laughs], you know, if I could put it that way. So I 
think patterns are important. They teach us some things. And this one is quite 
regular. 
 
TS: Alright. Rob has a question: 
15:50 
18:05 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
8 
 
If ancient people were so wrong about the earth being inside of a 
dome holding back chaotic waters, why should I accept their views 
on supernatural beings or unseen realm as being correct? I’m 
struggling to be consistent in how I interpret the Bible. So they were 
wrong about the physical world but correct about the spiritual 
world? How do I reconcile this? 
 
MH: Well, the fuller answer to this is on my website. It’s under the FAQ. Go to 
www.drmsh.com. Look at the FAQ, and it’s the last question in the FAQ. So I’m 
not going to repeat that here. People who are listening to this episode can just go 
up and read it.  
 
In a couple of sentences, how you approach this is that the natural world is 
subject to the tools of science and the tools of human inquiry because we are 
part of the creation and we have the faculties to examine the creation and learn 
about it. None of that is true in the spiritual world. The spiritual world is not 
subject to the tools of science. It is not subject to human inquiry. Why? Because 
we’re not part of it. So there’s a fundamental disconnect between what is said 
about the natural world by people—by human writers… Their knowledge is quite 
limited, even in the world that they belonged to. It’s ultra-limited (as in basically 
nonexistent) when it comes to the spiritual world. The only way people know 
anything about the spiritual world is what God reveals to them. It is not 
discoverable with human faculties. So that is the fundamental difference. And 
that’s why the two conclusions can cohere together. Again, for more, just go up 
to drmsh.com, look under FAQ, and it’s the last question. 
 
TS: Ross wants to know: 
 
Why are the sons of God who committed sin (in Genesis 6) called 
sons of God in Genesis 6, yet called “angels” in the New Testament 
(like Jude 6 and 2 Peter 2:4) and not “sons of God” if they (sons of 
God and angels) are different, which we know they are? 
 
MH: Well, they’re not different. This is a misunderstanding of terminology. An 
angel is a different term. It’s a job description. “Sons of God” is not a job 
description. It is a description of rank. So over in the spiritual world, all members 
of the spiritual world (all inhabitants of the spiritual world) get referred to 
sometimes by what I would call ontological terms (terms that tell you what they 
are). They are spirits, for instance. They are elohim. They’re all this. But they can 
get called different things to either convey what they do or where they rank. So 
they’re not different entities. They might have different rank. They might have 
different jobs. Let me use myself as an example. I can be referred to as a “man”, 
“husband”, “father”, “son”, “uncle”, “leader”, “servant”, “boss”, and “employee” in 
the same paragraph, but it’s still just me. Those terms… And there are 
ontological terms in that list I just gave you and there are functional terms in that 
20:05 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
9 
list. The different terms don’t mean that every term refers to a different person. 
Or in this case, the different terminology used of the rebels of Genesis 6 don’t 
mean that they’re different groups.  
 
In addition, Peter’s getting his vocabulary from the Septuagint (Greek translation 
of the Old Testament). In Genesis 6:2, that’s what it reads. It reads “angels”. He’s 
writing in Greek, so that what he uses. In my Angels book, I discuss in the first 
chapter these terminological buckets. And there’s a lot of confusion in this 
regard, and I think that’s at the heart of this question. 
 
TS: Ross also wants to know: 
 
Does Psalm 8:5 where humankind is called a "little less than the 
angels" (which in the original is "elohim") make angels and elohim 
interchangeable? 
 
MH: Yeah. The answer again is the Septuagint. The vocabulary in the Hebrew 
Bible (the Hebrew terminology) was a lot more varied and a lot more nuanced 
than Greek. As the Hebrew Bible gets translated into Greek (that’s the 
Septuagint in the Second Temple or the intertestamental period), the translators 
there don’t always have a different Greek term for each Hebrew term. They begin 
to start using angelos (angel) as just an umbrella (a catch-all) term. “He’s talking 
now about some member of the heavenly host. We’ll just call that an angel.” So 
that’s what happens in the course of putting the Hebrew Bible into Greek 
translation. And since New Testament writers (like the author of Hebrews) are 
going to be using the Septuagint, they don’t correct it. They don’t alter it. They 
just use the Septuagint. This is the Bible that the people they’re writing to are 
going to be reading, because everybody in the first century world that was literate 
could read Greek. You can’t say that about Hebrew. That was definitely a 
minority reading language, even in the Jewish community, where the main 
language was Aramaic by this time. It was not Hebrew. Hebrew, of course, is 
going to be retained by the religious class (the scribes and the Pharisees)—the 
more professional class. But the average person is either going to be reading the 
Septuagint (everybody reads Greek) or they’re going to be reading a Targum 
(which is an Aramaic translation). So this is just a phenomenon of translation. 
 
TS: Our next question is from Dave.  
 
In Psalm 8:4-5 it says of man, "yet you have made him a little lower 
than the heavenly beings and crowned him with glory and honor." 
How would an Israelite think of this in a divine council worldview? Is 
the concept "made him a little lower" more about location, on the 
earth, OR does it have to do with position and authority? Is there 
some connection to the position/location of the nachash? 
 
22:20 
24:20 
25:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
10 
MH: Yeah, I think lower here is a way of saying “lesser”. Most scholars (and I’m 
in this bunch here) would take this ontologically, therefore. In other words, a 
supernatural being (Psalm 8 has elohim—“a little lower than the elohim”) is 
superior to an embodied earthly being. So I take it as an ontological statement. 
The reference wouldn’t be related to God’s presence, because God was present 
in Eden. So it’s not a distance thing from God. Heaven is a lot higher than the 
earth, if we want to even conceptualize it physically. So that really doesn’t fit. 
There’s no distance factor here, because God was present with these beings he 
created, even though they’re lower (they’re lesser). So I don't think there’s a 
distance factor here. Even taking the heavenly idea or the presence of God idea 
metaphorically (let’s just broaden it to the spiritual world) to refer to the 
heavenlies or something like that, that’s a lot different than the physical world. 
But that world and the physical world are combined in Eden, because God has 
come to earth.  
 
So I think the only thing that really fits is the ontological perspective. “A little lower 
than the elohim” means just lesser. You could say “a little” lower. Well, okay. 
How much is “little?” How much is “much?” I think the “little” there is worded that 
way because God does create humanity in or as his image. So the language is 
designed to communicate both a similarity, but also just a lower (lesser) 
ontological status.  
 
And lastly, I don't think this has anything to do with the nachash specifically, 
because it’s a statement about humanity’s created status. It’s not a post-fall 
statement. It’s not something that would be said in the context of Genesis 3. It’s 
something that is stated in the context of human creation. 
 
TS: Our next two questions are from Matthew from Appleton, WI. The first one is: 
 
Why is there an apocryphal tradition in the different versions of Life 
of Adam and Eve of Cain being born with some kind of glow or skin 
radiance? How does this relate to 1 Enoch where Noah is born 
glowing and talking? In the Enochian narrative, Lamech (Noah’s 
father) is afraid that his newborn son is a product of the Watchers. 
Were Second Temple Jews drawing the same conclusion about 
Cain? Is this a byproduct of their understanding of Genesis 4:1 or is 
there something else at play? 
 
MH: You know, I have my pseudepigrapha open (the Charlesworth edition) for 
the sake of this Q&A. And searching for all of the reference for Cain in the Life of 
Adam and Eve (either the Greek version or the Latin version, at least the 
versions that are in Charlesworth’s pseudepigrapha), and I can’t find any 
reference to what Matthew is talking about, about Cain being born with glowing 
skin. So I guess that’s my answer. I would need some kind of passage reference. 
Because I’m just not seeing a single example. Now that’s a whole lot different 
than Noah in 1 Enoch. That’s very clear. In fact, for those who are interested in 
27:10 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
11 
this, it’s 1 Enoch 106. And I’ll read a little bit from Nickelsburg here (his 
commentary on Enoch) about this description of Noah. In fact, why don’t we just, 
just so that people can get a little feel for this… Let me just open up Charlesworth 
here to Enoch (instead of Life of Adam and Eve) and I’ll just read a little bit of 
this. Because there’s no ambiguity in this instance, whereas the other one, like I 
said, I can’t really find a single reference to this. But chapter 106 of 1 Enoch 
says: 
 
1 And after some days my son, Methuselah, took a wife for his son Lamech, and 
she became pregnant by him and bore him a son. 2 And his body was white as 
snow and red as a rose [MH: How can you be both white and red? Maybe it’s 
pinkish in places. Who knows.]; the hair of his head as white as wool and his 
demdema beautiful;  
 
It’s a foreign word (demdema) and then “was beautiful”. That term (demdema)… 
There’s really no English equivalent. It’s going to sound funny. But it refers to a 
big head of curly hair. So if you’re thinking, like, an afro, that’s essentially what it 
is. [laughs] 
 
…and as for his eyes, when he opened them the whole house glowed like the 
sun—(rather) the whole house glowed even more exceedingly. 
 
Then it goes on to describe Noah, and just the gloriousness of his face. Down in 
verse 5: 
 
 His eyes were was like rays of the sun. His face was glorious.  
 
And then in verse 6:  
 
It does not seem to me [MH: his dad says] that he is of me, but of angels, and I 
fear that a wondrous phenomenon may take place upon the earth in his days.  
 
[Laughs] So this sort of freaks Dad out to see Noah in 1 Enoch 106. So this is 
what Matthew is talking about in his question. But there’s nothing like this that I 
can find used of Cain in Life of Adam and Eve. So I would need a verse 
reference. But back to Nickelsburg. Nickelsburg summarizes 1 Enoch 106 this 
way. He says: 
 
Lamech reacts in terror to what he perceives to be the incarnation of a forbidden 
angelic conception, but he learns that the child’s unearthly beauty is actually 
symbolic of his divinely sanctioned salvific function… 
 
So later on in 1 Enoch 106, these things are symbols of Noah’s righteousness 
and basically his destiny to preserve humanity through the Flood. Nickelsburg 
adds: 
30:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
12 
 
Noteworthy, especially in 1QapGen 2 [MH: that’s the Genesis Apocryphon, which 
is another story besides chapter 106 of Enoch where Lamech wonders, “Hey, is 
this my kid or is it from the Watchers?” It’s another kind of text like that], is the 
similarity between Lamech’s suspicion of his wife and Joseph’s concern about 
Mary’s mysterious pregnancy in Matthew 1. [MH: So Nickelsburg compares those 
a little bit.] In addition, in both sets of stories the supernatural conception of the 
child is at issue. In the Noah stories a forbidden supernatural conception is 
denied; in Matthew and Luke a conception by the Holy Spirit is affirmed… 
 
Strikingly, the canonical accounts [MH: Matthew and Luke—the Gospel accounts] 
about Jesus’ birth are completely lacking in the kind of legendary details about 
the child’s appearance that are present in the Noah story. 
 
So I think that’s worth pointing out. This is the kind of internet theology you’ll get. 
“Oh, Jesus’ birth is just like what happens with Noah in the book of Enoch.” Well, 
actually it’s not. It’s quite a bit different. So I thought it was worth adding that 
detail from Nickelsburg. So I don't know how else to proceed with this question. 
Because like I said, I just searched for the name Cain in the Life of Adam and 
Eve and I don't have anything. I can’t find anything that sounds like what I just 
read about Noah from 1 Enoch 106.  
 
TS: Matthew’s second question is: 
 
Isaiah 43:3-4 uses language that made wonder if it is intended to be a 
hyperlink to Deuteronomy 32 and Yahweh's disinheritance of the 
nations and His choosing/creation of Israel. I noticed in the very next 
chapter, Isaiah 44:2, that Isaiah uses the term Jeshurun for Israel. 
This term is found only in Deuteronomy 32 and 33. Is there 
something here? 
 
MH: I actually have two studies on this. One is a journal article. The other one is 
a chapter from a book. So I went back and looked at this. I’ll just read the titles 
because I’ll stick them both in the protected folder, if people are interested in 
reading these. One is by Ronald Bergey. It’s called “The Song of Moses 
(Deuteronomy 32.1-43) and Isaianic Prophecies: A Case of Early Intertextuality?” 
And the other one is by Hyun Chul Paul Kim. The chapter is called “The Song of 
Moses in Isaiah 40-55.” And that’s in a book called God’s Word for Our World: 
Biblical Studies in Honor of Simon John De Vries, which is a 2004 title. Neither of 
those studies note any connection or suggest any connection for Isaiah 43:3-4. 
And if you actually look at the passage, I wouldn’t expect any, because both of 
these studies are linguistically oriented. In other words, they’re looking for actual 
vocabulary in the Hebrew text. Let me just read Isaiah 43:3-4 so that people don’t 
wonder why the question was asked and why I’m saying it this way. So Isaiah 
43:3 says: 
32:40 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
13 
 
3 For I am the LORD your God, 
    the Holy One of Israel, your Savior. 
I give Egypt as your ransom, 
    Cush and Seba in exchange for you. 
4 Because you are precious in my eyes, 
    and honored, and I love you, 
I give men in return for you, 
    peoples in exchange for your life. 
 
So you could read that as this idea of Yahweh taking Israel as his own (that’s 
Deuteronomy 4:19-20 that parallels Deuteronomy 32:8) and, by definition, sort of 
giving away some of these other countries. And I think that’s what Matthew’s 
question is about. But you don’t have any actual vocabulary connections 
between those two verses in Hebrew and back in Deuteronomy 32. So I’m not 
surprised that neither of these studies note this, even though you could read it 
and imagine a conceptual connective idea.  
 
I think there’s probably a better… I would say there are better ways to interpret 
the language of Isaiah 43 than to reference Deuteronomy 32. But just going with 
these studies, they’re linguistically oriented, and so I’m not surprised that they 
didn’t note this.  
 
However, the Jeshurun example (from Isaiah 44:2)… And that term is only found 
elsewhere in Deuteronomy 32 and 33. They both note that connection. That 
seems to be much more explicit (again, because of the vocabulary connections). 
So I’m going to read a little section from Kim. He comments about Jeshurun 
here. He says: 
 
Concerning the echoes of Jacob [MH: that’s obviously a term for Israel] and 
Jeshurun in Deuteronomy 32 and Deutero-Isaiah [MH: Isaiah 44], it is true that 
the term and notion of ‘Jacob’ cannot be seen as anything unique. Admittedly, 
Israel has been called ‘Jacob’ in numerous parts of the Hebrew Bible, all the more 
in the prophetic literature… 
 
And he just proceeds to give us a grocery list of references. And he says: 
 
Nonetheless, as the simple name ‘Jacob’ along with ‘Israel’ often depicts the 
mysterious servant in Deutero-Isaiah, the significance of this name in the Song of 
Moses cannot be quickly dismissed where the name likewise conveys both 
individual and collective nuances. 
 
35:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
14 
So let me just stop there. So he’s noting here that “Jacob” and “Israel”… There’s 
both a collective and an individual sense. And then he shifts to Jeshurun, which 
is hardly ever used. So there’s a little bit of a nuance there. He says: 
 
More importantly, this name [MH: (Jacob and Israel)] occurs in parallel with the 
peculiar name ‘Jeshurun’ [MH: so that helps identify it] in Deut. 32:14–15 and Isa. 
44:2. The name ‘Jeshurun’ occurs only in two other places in the Hebrew Bible 
(Deut. 33:5, 26)! In all these passages, the names of Jacob and Jeshurun occur in 
parallel. In addition to the fact that these appellations occur in pairs, both names 
are associated with the imagery of YHWH’s nurturing and fostering YHWH’s 
people… [MH: He has some citations there.] 
 
It is possible and likely that the names Jeshurun paired with Jacob were 
commonly used in other traditions and transmissions. In the extant canonical 
shape [MH: the Hebrew Bible as we have it], however, finding such a parallel only 
in these two sources is remarkable. Calling and identifying Jacob as YHWH’s 
allotted inheritance and the archaic name Jeshurun simultaneously demonstrate 
that one author may have been well aware of, and quite possibly (or even 
deliberately) alluding to, the other. 
 
I’ll just stop there. So that’s Kim’s way of saying, “Yeah, there’s got to be a 
connection here. Isaiah pretty much has to have Deuteronomy 32 and 
Deuteronomy 33 in mind to use this unusual term.” So in regard to the second 
one, yep, there’s a connection there that takes us back into Deuteronomy 32, 
specifically the allotment idea. But as far as the previous one (the earlier 
citation—Isaiah 43:3-4), neither of these studies think there’s anything to that. 
 
TS: Alright, Mike, another good round of questions. And don’t forget, you can 
send me your questions at TreyStricklin@gmail.com or Trey@NakedBible.com 
and I’ll put them in the queue. Again, we apologize that we can’t get to 
everybody. We’ve got tons of them. But I do my best to try to pick them out. So 
there you go. 
 
MH: Yep. 
 
TS: Well, Mike, I wanted to bring up some happy news. And that is, I was just 
looking around at our stats out there. It’s just iTunes specific. But I noticed that 
we were actually in the “Christian” category… 
 
MH: That’s good. [laughs]  
 
TS: [laughs] We were ranked 7th in Ireland, 4th in Poland, and 4th in New Zealand. 
And we were actually the #1 Christian podcast in Slovakia. 
 
MH: Sweet.  

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 331: Q&A 39 
 
15 
 
TS: How cool is that? 
 
MH: That’s pretty cool. All that’s pretty cool, when you really think about the 
geography there. Wow. That’s crazy. 
 
TS: And not just that, but that in Slovakia we were 44th in all of podcasts (in its 
entirety). 
 
MH: Wow. 
 
TS: And also in South Africa, we were 200th in all of the podcasts in its entirety. 
And in the Philippines, we were 138th of all the podcasts out there in the world. 
That’s crazy. 
 
MH: Yeah, that is. 
 
TS: So we appreciate those countries listening to us. So shout-out to all of them. 
 
MH: Yeah, absolutely. 
 
TS: Slovakia making us #1. 
 
MH: It’s remarkable.  
 
TS: We appreciate everybody out there listening to us. So that’s pretty cool. 
 
MH: Yeah, absolutely. 
 
TS: Alright, Mike, again, from your #1 podcast in Slovakia, thanks again for 
listening to the Naked Bible… 
 
MH: Right. 
 
TS: [laughs] And for everybody out there listening to the Naked Bible Podcast, 
God bless. 
 
 
 
40:00 

---PAGE---
