Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
1 
Naked Bible Podcast Transcript 
Episode 377 
Revelation 9 
May 22, 2021 
 
Teacher: Dr. Michael S. Heiser (MH) 
Host: Trey Stricklin (TS) 
 
Episode Summary  
 
Revelation 9 reveals John’s vision of the fifth and six trumpet judgments. Several 
interpretive issues are immediately apparent. What is the nature of the angel with 
the key to the bottomless pit (Rev 9:1)? Is this angel the same or different than 
that in Rev 9:11 or Abbadon/Apollyon? Who or what is being released from the 
bottomless pit (Rev 9:3-11)? These questions take the reader into the wider 
question of whether Revelation’s apocalyptic descriptions should be read in 
terms of modern analogies. In this episode we discern how the release of evil 
supernatural beings from the bottomless pit has clear connections to how 
Second Temple Jewish texts and 2 Peter describe the imprisoned Watchers, the 
sons of God of Genesis 6:1-4 infamy, and how the odd descriptions of those 
beings in insect and animal form have clear, abundant antecedents in the Old 
Testament. 
 
 
Transcript 
 
TS: Welcome to the Naked Bible Podcast, Episode 377: Revelation 9. I’m the 
layman, Trey Stricklin, and he’s the scholar, Dr. Michael Heiser. Hey, Mike! 
What's going on? 
 
MH: Well, I have a pug update. The pugs have now been introduced to the pool 
properly. 
 
TS: With life jackets? 
 
MH: With life jackets, of course. And their attitude toward the pool has moved 
from hysteria to mild hysteria. [laughter] They didn’t like it. But they took it a notch 
down because after flapping around in the pool… You know, we held them up. 
We didn’t just throw them in there. You know? But they were willing to stand in 
the water on the top step. It goes about halfway up a pug. So I think they’ll still 
like it to cool off. But I don't expect to see them swimming laps anytime soon. 
 
TS: Yeah. Well, that’s a big step, if they’ll at least stand in it. 
 
MH: Yeah. 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
2 
TS: Do you all let the pugs out and run around in the back yard when you’re in 
the house? Or are you all always out in the back yard with them? 
 
MH: We let them out now. We know they’re not going to jump in. 
 
TS: Yeah, that’s my fear. 
 
MH: So they’re sufficiently spooked. 
 
TS: Yeah. That’s why I don't let my dog… Or we don’t try to get him to like the 
pool. Because I don't want to have to think about him jumping in the pool when 
he’s out there by himself. So I’m glad that our dog does not like to swim. He 
hates it. 
 
MH: Yeah. If they ever got to like it, we’d just have to put the life jacket on and 
leave it on. Unless it’s in the evening when we were going to bring them into the 
pool. But yeah, the in and out thing, we’d have to leave it on. But there’s no 
danger of that right now. [laughs] 
 
TS: And as we approach summer, how many times… I’m going to say the 
over/under for visits to the beach by you is 1 ½. And I’m going to go with “under.”  
 
MH: [laughs] Well, I’ve not been there yet. 
 
TS: Exactly. 
 
MH: I almost went this weekend. I told Drenna I would do that, but then she 
changed her mind and they made some other plan. My daughter was down here. 
So that wiped that off. So I’m still at zero. 
 
TS: I’m going to leave that over/under at 1 ½ for the whole summer. [laughter] 
And we’re going to revisit and see how many times you made it to the beach, 
since you live a few miles away from it. 
 
MH: Yep. Yep. So what counts as going to the beach? Like physically walking on 
the beach? 
 
TS: Yeah, your feet hit the sand. 
 
MH: Okay, they’ve got to hit the sand, alright. 
 
TS: Touch the sand. 
 
MH: Alright. 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
3 
TS: Yeah, that’s what I mean. If you’re driving by it or you’re parked in the 
parking lot, that doesn’t count. Your feet have to hit the sand. 
 
MH:  I asked because of the parking lot. Because you’ll get sand in the parking 
lot, but there’s a fence. So to pass beyond the threshold there, that’s what 
counts. Okay. 
 
TS: Yes, exactly. The sand has to be on sand, not on concrete. It has to be 
literally on the naturally occurring sand to count. And you can’t game it either. So 
you can’t at the end of the summer say, “I haven’t been to the beach yet. I want 
to win this.” And you just go to spike the total. Because that’s cheating.  
 
MH: No, I won’t do that. If I get forced to go or talked into going for some other 
reason, then we’ll count that. 
 
TS: Yeah, you can count that. Alright, there you go, folks. [MH laughs] If you live 
in the Jacksonville area, keep an eye out for a Heiser spotting. Keep your 
binoculars handy. And let me know. 
 
MH: I don't think I’ll be too conspicuous. Maybe the person that has no tan at all 
or something like that. But it probably won’t count because there are plenty of 
people who visit it. 
 
TS: I saw a few pictures of you wearing shorts, so I know you’re wearing shorts 
on a regular basis. 
 
MH: Yeah, I’ll wear shorts if it gets hot. 
 
TS: There you go. Alright. That’s good stuff, Mike. 
 
MH: Yeah. Yeah, this is riveting, I know. This is why people tune in, these sorts 
of details. 
 
TS: Oh, yeah. We ought to see how long we can go. Because for the people who 
fast forward, I want them to actually get some of this. [MH laughs] They skip. 
“Another 30 seconds.” “Thirty more seconds.” So keep talking. 
 
MH: We could do musical interludes, and then we start talking about this stuff. 
That’ll trap them. Because they won’t know when it begins or ends. We could do 
that. 
 
TS: That’s what we’re about: forcing people to listen to our chatter. 
 
MH: [laughs] Right. Yeah, absolutely. 
 
5:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
4 
TS: Alright, Mike. Well, hey, we’ve got an entire chapter all by itself today. 
 
MH: Yes we do. We ‘re not divvying up anything. This is Revelation 9. And for 
those people out there who have not been already mesmerized by our 
preliminary chat here… Try to come out of that. We’re going to get back to the 
biblical stuff here. For those of you who have read Reversing Hermon, you’ve 
been introduced to my thoughts very briefly in relation to Revelation 9, 
specifically about the locusts that come out of the pit. We’re going to get into that 
today. So I have said and written something about Revelation 9 prior to today, 
but we’re going to, as the series dictates, go through the whole chapter and look 
at Old Testament backdrops and antecedents and points of origin for what we 
read in Revelation 9. So I’m going to cut it in half. The whole chapter goes 
through Trumpets 5 and 6. And it’s kind of neatly divisible. The first 12 verses 
really deal with Trumpet 5. So let’s just jump in there. And then when we hit 
verse 13, we’ll be on Trumpet 6. So I’m just going to read through these 12 
verses here in the ESV so we have it in our heads: 
 
 And the fifth angel blew his trumpet, and I saw a star fallen from heaven to 
earth, and he was given the key to the shaft of the bottomless pit. 2 He opened 
the shaft of the bottomless pit, and from the shaft rose smoke like the smoke 
of a great furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened with the smoke from 
the shaft. 3 Then from the smoke came locusts on the earth, and they were 
given power like the power of scorpions of the earth. 4 They were told not to 
harm the grass of the earth or any green plant or any tree, but only those 
people who do not have the seal of God on their foreheads. 5 They were 
allowed to torment them for five months, but not to kill them, and their 
torment was like the torment of a scorpion when it stings someone. 6 And in 
those days people will seek death and will not find it. They will long to die, but 
death will flee from them. 
 
7 In appearance the locusts were like horses prepared for battle: on their heads 
were what looked like crowns of gold; their faces were like human faces, 8 their 
hair like women's hair, and their teeth like lions' teeth; 9 they had breastplates 
like breastplates of iron, and the noise of their wings was like the noise of 
many chariots with horses rushing into battle. 10 They have tails and stings like 
scorpions, and their power to hurt people for five months is in their 
tails. 11 They have as king over them the angel of the bottomless pit. His name 
in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek he is called Apollyon. 
 
12 The first woe has passed; behold, two woes are still to come. 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
5 
So this is Trumpet 5. And again, we’re not commenting on End Times systems 
and goofy interpretations. Let me just make one little comment about that. These 
are not tanks and missiles and things like that, because they were there to 
“torment” or “harm” the people on the earth. And here’s what we get in verse 5:  
 
They were allowed to torment them for five months, but not to kill them… 
 
I would suggest to you that if this is a tank or a missile, people are going to die. 
So right away the literal interpretation, even without getting into the Old 
Testament imagery, is sort of ridiculous. And again, I don't think that’s going to 
surprise anyone. What might surprise people is how deeply this imagery is 
embedded in or can be drawn from the Old Testament. So that’s what we’re 
going to get into.  
 
Now we’re going to start in the first verse here. You know, “a star fallen from 
heaven to earth” at the beginning of the fifth trumpet. Now there are two 
approaches to identifying this fallen star. And I think this is worth getting into. 
We’re going to traverse into Second Temple literature here. And some of this is 
going to be a little bit familiar from some things we’ve had before, up until 
Revelation 9, about falling stars and this sort of imagery. But I want to zero in on 
a couple of things here very specifically.  
 
So there are two approaches to answering the question, “Well, who or what is 
this?” The context at least makes obvious that this is a supernatural being. That 
much nobody really argues about. The points of controversy, though, are as 
follows. There are three of them: 
 
1. Is this being is a good angel in God’s service (a supernatural being loyal to 
God) or a fallen (evil) celestial being, perhaps even Satan himself? So 
that’s the first question. 
 
2. Is this fallen star with “the key to the shaft of the bottomless pit” the same 
as the angel of Revelation 20:1, which says, “I saw an angel coming down 
from heaven, holding in his hand the key to the bottomless pit and a great 
chain?” 
 
3. If one opts for the fallen star being evil, is that fallen star the same being 
as Abaddon in Revelation 9:11 (ten verses later)? 
 
So those are the three fundamental questions you get from the very first verse.  
 
Now I’m going to go through a couple of approaches here to this. In terms of a 
first approach, Aune in his commentary takes the view that the fallen star of 
Revelation 9:1 is an angel but is not the angel of 9:11. So the celestial being of 
10:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
6 
verse 1 is not Abaddon of verse 11. That he is an angel, Aune argues, is based 
on the parallel passage Rev 20:1. Okay?  
 
1I saw an angel coming down from heaven, holding in his hand the key to the 
bottomless pit and a great chain. 
 
So he says, if you look at Revelation 20:1, it’s so similar to 9:1. And it’s pretty 
obvious that this is a supernatural being and an angel. He further argues that the 
angel mentioned in 9:11 renames Abaddon (in other words, he is Abaddon). So 
the angel mentioned in 9:11 is Abaddon. The angel mentioned in 9:11 is not this 
first angel of Revelation 9:1. So that’s Aune’s view. And he writes this: 
 
John does not say that he actually saw the star fall; he says only that he saw the 
star after it had fallen. In 9:1b–2a it becomes obvious that the “star” is a 
supernatural being, i.e., an angel. In early Jewish literature, stars can represent 
angelic beings [MH: this is obvious] (Judg 5:20; Job 38:7; Dan 8:10)... Falling stars 
often represent evil angelic beings or demons [MH: and he has a slew of quotes 
here] (1 Enoch 86:3; 88:1; 90:24; T. Sol. 20.14–17; Jude 13), or even [MH: could 
be] Satan (1 Enoch 86:1; Apoc. El. 4:11; Luke 10:18 [MH: that’s the “I saw Satan 
fall like lightning from heaven]; Rev 12:9) [MH: again, this “falling” language is his 
point]. Here the fallen star should be understood as an angelic messenger (see 
20:1) and not be identified with the angel of the abyss named Abaddon or 
Apollyon in 9:11... This angel is named only here in Revelation, and elsewhere in 
the OT and early Jewish literature is mentioned only in 4Q280 10 ii 7 
 
Let me just break in here. He’s saying that we only get the name Abaddon… The 
angel of 9:11 is named only here and in some early Jewish literature, specifically 
4Q280, which is a Dead Sea Scroll. It actually references the “Angel of the Pit, 
and Spirit of Abaddon.” Back to Aune: 
 
While in 4Q280 and related texts these two titles are alternate ways of describing 
Belial [MH: who would be the Satan figure in the Dead Sea Scrolls], in Revelation it 
is not at all clear that the angel of the abyss is a designation for Satan, for he is 
carefully named elsewhere with a selection of aliases in two different contexts 
([Revelation] 12:9; 20:2), and neither Abaddon nor the angel of the abyss is 
mentioned again. The fact that ἄγγελον [aggelōn] is articular here [MH: it has the 
definite article], however, suggests that the author expected the readers to be 
familiar with this figure [MH: this angel], i.e., that the angel of the abyss is none 
other than Satan-Belial [MH: he’s saying that’s possible]... Abaddon is a Hebrew 
term for the kingdom of the dead (Prov 15:11; Job 26:6; 28:22; 31:12; Ps 88:12) 
[MH: these passages reference this term Abaddon with the realm of the dead], 
used as a poetic parallel to Sheol (Job 26:6; Prov 15:11; 27:20; 1QH 3:16–19 [MH: 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
7 
a Dead Sea Scroll]), death (Job 28:22), the grave (Ps 88:11 [MH: in the Masoretic 
Text it’s verse 12]), and the abyss (4Q504 = 4QDibHama 7:8). 
 
So he’s saying, Abaddon could be Satan. We don’t know. But he’s saying that 
Abaddon (the angel there, the angel who is called Abaddon) is different than the 
one in 9:1. Now the key sentence in all that to parse (in Aune’s thinking) is “here 
the fallen star should be understood as an angelic messenger” based on 
Revelation 20:1, “and not be identified with the angel of the abyss named 
Abaddon…” Now I take this as indicating Aune sees a good angel in both 
Revelation 9:1 and 20:1. Others who are commenting on Aune’s work will argue 
that Aune still thinks the angel of Revelation 9:1 is evil, even though it’s not 
Abaddon. And they draw that conclusion based on Aune’s comments about 
“falling star” language being used of evil angels. I don't think Aune actually says 
that. And I don’t read him that way.  
 
Now here’s why it matters. The advantage interpretively of having a good angel 
in both Revelation 9:1 and Revelation 20:1 is consistency. There is no indication 
that the angel of Revelation 20:1 who holds the key to the Abyss is evil. There’s 
no indication he’s evil. And after all, he’s going to bind Satan. That’s his mission 
in Revelation 20:1. So if the angel of Revelation 9:1 was evil, while the one in 
20:1 is good, what you’d have is you’d have two different angels with the keys to 
the Abyss. And that seems to make little sense to me. We’ll return to that thought 
in a moment. But in my reading of Aune here, we have a good angel in both 9:1 
and 20:1, that angel being the same entity (it’s the same angel)… Again, in this 
approach, this is how you could understand it—the same angel in 9:1 and 20:1. 
In fact, they’re not only both good, it’s the same one. But he has two different 
missions. In Revelation 9:1 the angel’s mission is one of release (the release of 
forces under the command of Abaddon, a different figure mentioned in 9:11). And 
in Revelation 20:1, the same angel has the mission of coming back to the Abyss 
again, and this time he binds Satan. Alright?  
 
So as far as an identification more specifically of this angel (the one in 9:1 and 
the one also in 20:1, the one who has the key to the Abyss, to the pit), the best 
candidate is Uriel, who is the archangel who, in 1 Enoch, was actually the chief 
“over Tartarus.” Again Tartarus is a reference to the Abyss where the Watchers 
are held. And you get that from 1 Enoch 19:1; 20:1. Now another option, which is 
weaker in my view, is this angel could be Saraqael, which is another angel in 1 
Enoch who was “over … the spirits, who sin in the spirit.” I just don’t think that’s 
as good of a candidate. Because Uriel is specifically associated with the pit, 
which is known as Tartarus. Now Beale objects to both of these options—both of 
these (Uriel, Saraqael, and all this stuff)—because he says 1 Enoch never calls 
either one of them a “fallen star,” but reserves that language for evil fallen angels. 
So Beale rejects the idea totally that the angel of Revelation 9:1 is a good angel. 
So that brings us to the second view. 
  
15:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
8 
So if you’re going to see the angel in Revelation 9:1 as an evil being, that takes 
you in different territory. And this is where Beale is at. So Beale, in his 
commentary, discusses the issue of a good or bad fallen star entity in Revelation 
9:1 this way. Honestly, I think he gets in his own way here, but we’ll unpack why. 
He says: 
 
This [fallen star] image has been given various identifications. The main debate is 
whether this is a good or evil being. It could be either the archangel Uriel, who 
was chief “over Tartarus,” or the archangel Saraqael, who was “over … the spirits, 
who sin in the spirit” (1 En.19:1; 20:1–6; 21:1–10; Testament of Solomon 2). But 1 
Enoch never calls those figures “fallen stars” [MH: neither one of them]. Instead, 
this description is reserved exclusively for fallen angels under the confinement of 
the archangels. 
 
The star should rather be interpreted in the same way as the star in 8:10 
because of the parallel wording (“a star fell from heaven”). 
 
So that’s Beale’s short take on this. Now the question has to be asked… Let’s go 
to Revelation 8:10. I’m going to read this to you. Because he uses this as part of 
his justification. 
 
10 The third angel blew his trumpet, and a great star fell from heaven, blazing 
like a torch, and it fell on a third of the rivers and on the springs of 
water. 11 The name of the star is Wormwood.  
 
I threw in the first part of verse 11 there too. So he’s interpreting that as an evil 
fallen entity. We have to ask, though, in relation to that verse (Revelation 8:10) 
as to why an evil angel would fall from heaven. Is this his fall from grace? What 
does the “fall” language actually mean? And why would he do it when another 
angel blows the trumpet? Because it sounds like, if this fallen star (this 
Wormwood) is a celestial being (not an asteroid or something), why is he obeying 
the trumpet call of another angel if he’s evil? Why can’t this be an obedient angel 
wreaking chaos in judgment, just like the angels who wreaked the plagues back 
in Egypt did (back in Psalm 78:49-50)? If there is truly a parallel with the Exodus 
material (which they’re kind of obviously is), then why can’t the parallel 
encompass this point? In other words, why can’t the parallel also encompass the 
character—the nature—of the angel? I mean, back in Egypt, a whole company of 
angels (according to Psalm 78) were mediating the plagues. And if the plagues 
are the clear parallel (and they are) to these trumpets (including the one back in 
chapter 8), why can’t we conclude that this entity in chapter 8 is a good guy? And 
Beale’s answer’s going to be, “Well, he’s referred to as “fallen.” You know, again, 
the argument extends from this one word, even though the parallel 
characterization doesn’t call for that particular characterization of the angels 
involved back at the Exodus.  
20:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
9 
But anyway, let’s go back to some other problems. If the angel of Revelation 9:1 
is evil because of the “fallen” language, is the angel of Revelation 20:1 also evil? 
Now in Revelation 20:1, the word “fallen” doesn’t occur. There’s different 
language in Revelation 20:1. So the specific word “fallen” is absent, but yet they 
both have the keys to the Abyss. So if they’re two different angels (in other 
words, the one in Revelation 20:1, Beale says, “Well, that’s a good guy, because 
John doesn’t use the word “fallen” there”), then, again, now we wind up with a 
situation where we have two angels, both with the key to the pit. Are there two 
keys? Maybe there are two keys. Maybe they each have one. Or do the angels 
hand it off like a hall pass? And if the first angel is evil, why does he respond to 
the trumpet call? Why obey God’s judgment call? If you’re an angel in rebellion, 
why are you obeying now? 
 
Again, it just doesn’t make a whole lot of sense. And Beale doesn’t address any 
of these questions. So honestly, I’m skeptical of his skepticism on this point. 
There’s really no problem with having a good angel release the Watchers (and 
again, I think these guys are the Watchers) because it is part of their day of 
judgment. It’s not a jailbreak. They are being released (ultimately) to their own 
doom. This sequence of events is initiating Day of the Lord stuff.  
 
Now Justin Bass chimes in here a little bit. His book on the keys of Death and 
Hades is not specifically about these passages, but he says a few things in 
passing. But unfortunately, it doesn’t really resolve these issues. He writes that 
the verb about the key, that the key “is given” (it’s a passive reference)… He 
writes that the verb here in reference to the angel of 9:1 being given the key to 
the Abyss  
 
…occurs 21 times in Revelation and is used twice as much in reference to evil 
agents than in reference to good agents…  
 
And then he lists the verses where it’s a good guy and he lists the verses where 
it’s a bad guy. Now the flaw there is that the fact that the verb form under 
discussion is in fact used of good agents. It’s used of good guys. So that 
undermines the verb form as a criterion for determining that the angel of 
Revelation 9:1 is evil. The exegetical answer to this question is not determined 
by a head count—by a numerical count. That’s not how exegesis is done. You 
don’t do numerical counts. Okay? And Bass isn’t claiming that. He’s just making 
the observation.  
 
There’s also another logical flaw to having the angel of Revelation 9:1 be an evil 
being, one revealed by understanding what the abyss is. And we’ll get to this 
other logical flaw in a moment. But let’s talk about the abyss. Now ESV 
references “the bottomless pit” or “the pit.” The English phrase “bottomless pit” is 
a rendering of Greek abussos (which is “abyss”). Revelation 20:1-3 have this 
same term as being the place where Satan dwells, and so it can be understood 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
10 
as a partial synonym for Hades (at least a partial synonym). It’s hard to know 
how much it overlaps. But it overlaps some at least. So it’s a partial synonym for 
Hades (the place, not the personified being that we talked about weeks ago, 
when we were on the “keys” passage). And so it can be understood as a partial 
synonym also for the realm of the dead. Now a quote here from Aune in his 
Revelation commentary. He writes: 
 
In Revelation the beast ascends from the abyss (11:7; 17:8), and it is also the 
abode of Satan (20:1–3), of the angel of the abyss, Abaddon or Apollyon (9:11), 
and of demons (9:1–10). 
 
So again, this clearly… The abyss thing sounds like it’s the realm of the dead 
and where Satan lives and all that kind of stuff. Now there’s a reason why I say 
“partial.” We’ll get to that right now. In 1 Enoch 10:12-13, the abyss (abussos)… 
It’s the same term in the Greek text here of Enoch. This is the place where the 
offending Watchers (or sons of God of Genesis 6:1-4) are imprisoned “for 
seventy generations.” The partially synonymous relationship between the abyss 
and the realm of the dead is indicated by the fact that some members of the 
abyss are imprisoned and they’re unable to leave (that would be the Watchers 
from Genesis 6) whereas others (Satan and demons) are not imprisoned. So 
there can’t be a complete, total overlap between the abyss and the realm of the 
dead. It’s better to view the abyss as some sort of compartment or subset or 
something (part of, the neighborhood)—a subset location of the realm of the 
dead. Enoch, in the book of Enoch, actually visits the abyss in 1 Enoch 21:7-10. 
I’ll read this to kind of give you a flavor for how Jews would’ve thought of the 
abyss. This is why I’m getting into Second Temple literature—because John is 
using the same terminology. And again, this is no surprise. John has referenced 
Enoch and Enochian material before. But here’s 1 Enoch 21:7-10: 
 
7 I then proceeded [MH: Enoch is narrating this] from that area to another place 
which is even more terrible and saw a terrible thing: a great fire that was burning 
and flaming; the place had a cleavage (that extended) to the last sea, pouring out 
great pillars of fire; neither its extent nor its magnitude could I see nor was I able 
to estimate. 8 At that moment, what a terrible opening is this place and a pain to 
look at! 9 Then Uraʾel [Uriel], (one) of the holy angels who was with me [MH: 
remember, Uriel’s the one who’s supervising this place], responded and said to 
me, “Enoch, why are you afraid like this?” (I answered and said),” 10 “I am 
frightened because of this terrible place and the spectacle of this painful thing.” 
And he said unto me, “This place is the prison house of the angels [MH: 
specifically it’s going to be a reference to the Watchers in context]; they are 
detained here forever.” 
 
You probably know that the “forever” language here and elsewhere just means “a 
very long time.” Because elsewhere in Enoch it’s going to be “seventy 
25:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
11 
generations,” or “unto the time of the end” or something like that. There are other 
phrases that are used of this place and their punishment.  
 
So this abyss, then is… This is the chief parallel to the lake of fire alluded to in 
Rev 20:10 and also Matthew 25:41 (“made for the devil and his angels”). This is 
the place of the final judgment ultimately of both human unbelievers and “the 
devil and his angels.” So this overlap points to this other point of incongruence 
with Beale’s notion that the angel of Revelation 9:1 is evil. Now here’s the point. 
If Jesus… I mean, think back to our earlier episode when we talked about 
Revelation 1:18 and Revelation… Let me just look up the phrase “Death and 
Hades.” So it’s in one of these episodes. It’s the episode on Revelation 1:18. 
Revelation 1:18 is where we get the reference to Death and Hades. And we 
discussed that verse in relationship to… Let’s look up the word “keys.” Because 
there were two of them in Revelation. And also Revelation 3:7. So the episodes 
where we talk about the keys of Death and Hades (and in Revelation 3 it’s the 
key of David)… I believe it is the episode on Revelation 3, because we deferred 
talking about the keys of Death and Hades until we got to the second “key” 
reference.  
 
But you recall from that episode when we talked about the keys of Death and 
Hades, Jesus took them. He took the keys of Death and Hades from (again, if 
you remember the discussion) those personified entities (Death and Hades). 
Hades wasn’t just the place in that discussion and in these passages. These 
places have a personification of an evil supernatural being called Death and 
Hades. And Jesus takes the keys from them. In other words, he is now the 
master of life and death because he descends there. This is one of the things he 
does. And of course, he rises from the dead. So if that’s the case, it makes zero 
sense for Jesus to hand the key back to an evil agent in Revelation 9:1 (or 
anywhere else). So again, this is why I am simply not persuaded of Beale’s 
position, regardless of the “fallen” language. Again, he’s too focused on this one 
adjective. And he’s not considering the wider context, especially the keys of 
Death and Hades and who holds them. It just makes no sense. It makes no 
sense at all. Because not only would you have Jesus giving the keys back… 
(Like why would he do that? It destroys the imagery and the theology of what that 
means.) But you also now have either a situation where you have two evil 
angels… They each have keys. Or there’s a good one and a bad one. They each 
have keys. Or they pass the keys from one to… It just doesn’t make any sense. 
It’s far better to just have one good angel in Revelation 9:1 and Revelation 21 
who has the single key. Again, if the angel is loyal to God and loyal to the risen 
Christ, then you could see it make sense to hand that key to the angel and say, 
“Go unlock the abyss,” or, “Go do this and that.” It doesn’t make any sense if 
you’re handing it over to a rebel. Zero. 
 
30:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
12 
A few other items. The abyss is also an Old Testament metaphor for chaos. We 
should mention this, because again, this is good Old Testament imagery. Aune 
writes: 
  
The term abussos... means “without depth,” i.e., “fathomless, boundless,” and 
was used to refer to the infinite void or a subterranean region beneath the earth 
(in accordance with a three-level view of the universe). The term abussos occurs 
seven times in Revelation (9:1, 2, 11; 11:7; 17:8; 20:1, 3). Five of these occur in 
two passages in which the three-level cosmology of Revelation is implied (9:1–11; 
20:1–3). 
 
Now Beale and McDonough, in the commentary on The New Testament Use of 
the Old Testament, add this: 
 
The abyss in the LXX is always related to water, whether it be the chaotic 
waters—the “primeval deep”—of the creation account [MH: and the obvious 
reference is Genesis 1:2, but you get Psalm 104:6 in the English] (Gen. 1:2; Ps. 
103:6 [104:6 ET]), the waters of the sea [MH: is another way it’s described] (Isa. 
63:13), or the waters below the earth (Ezek. 31:15). Because all of these could be 
symbolically associated with evil forces [MH: remember, the sea and waters are 
chaos metaphors in the Old Testament], however, by NT times the abyss was 
spoken of more broadly as the place of punishment and/or confinement for 
wicked spirits… 
 
And again, we have all these passages in Enoch and Revelation that we’ve 
already quoted. He adds here Jubilees 5:6–14; 2 Pet. 2:4 (that’s the reference to 
Tartarus); 4 Ezra 7:36; Pr. Man. 3. So Beale and McDonough say:  
 
This clearly is what is in view here. 
 
So what this means is that we’re dealing with… It’s a three-tiered cosomology, 
which doesn’t conform to a scientific worldview. We’ve talked about this many 
times before. It also deals with the afterlife and the supernatural world, because 
this is where spiritual beings live. Either the disembodied dead or demons or 
Satan or Abaddon… These are celestial beings. These are by nature 
disembodied beings, all of them. So we’re not in the physical world anymore. So 
the three-tiered cosmology isn’t like, “Well, if you dug a hole deep enough into 
the earth, you could find this place.” That’s false. It doesn’t have latitude and 
longitude. So that’s not what is going on here. And that’s why, since it’s actually 
a… These are all metaphors for the part of the spiritual world where evil exists 
and is confined and ultimately the unbelieving dead—that sort of thing, those 
lines of thought. That’s why it can be referred to as watery and also fiery. 
Because both of those things, especially the water, are chaos symbols. They are 
symbols of judgment and death and something frightening that can harm you. So 
35:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
13 
on and so forth. This is why you get this seemingly… Physically these things 
don’t pair (water and fire). But it doesn’t matter because we’re not talking about a 
place with latitude and longitude. So I think it’s important to bring that out, and I 
think Beale and McDonough have a nice little paragraph there to summarize that.  
 
Now let’s get into verse 3, really verses 3-10. Who or what is released? Now I’ve 
already hinted that I think this is the release of the Watchers imprisoned—those 
sons of God from Genesis 6, known as Watchers in Second Temple literature 
from before the flood. And I’m not alone here. This is not just Mike. There are a 
number of people who take this view. Now Steven Thompson writes in his article, 
“The End of Satan...” This is from Andrews University Seminary Studies. It’s a 
1999 publication. He writes: 
 
The most suitable sequel to the time of imprisonment described in 1 Enoch 10… 
 
We just read 1 Enoch 21, but chapter 10 is a lot the same. This is where the 
Watchers are sent. 
 
The most suitable sequel to the time of imprisonment described in 1 Enoch 10 
can be found in Rev[elation] 9 where the key to the abyss is given to a fallen star 
(or to the fifth, trumpet-blowing, angel?) [MH: he as a question mark there, so it’s 
an ambiguity in his mind] who uses it [MH: this fallen star uses it] to open the 
shaft to the abyss and facilitate the release of imprisoned demonic forces who 
emerge to terrorize earth dwellers. 
 
Frankly, the point is that this is the only group. It’s the group from Genesis 6, i.e., 
the Watchers. This is the only group of evil, supernatural beings (fallen, sinful, 
supernatural beings, so whatever term you want to use) who are imprisoned in all 
of Second Temple Jewish literature. So the fact that they’re releasing some from 
the same place in Revelation 9 really narrows the possibilities as to who these 
could be. There’s clearly a textual relationship between Revelation 9 and 
Enochian material and Second Temple Jewish material that has the original 
offending Watchers imprisoned in the pit to await final judgment. Again, this is in 
1 Enoch in a number of places: chapters 10, 18, 19, 21, 54, 88, 90; Jubilees 5; 2 
Peter 2, as we read a few moments ago. And 2 Peter 2:4 is important, because it 
uses the verb tartaroō (sent to Tartarus). And Tartarus, according to Enoch, is 
where the Watchers are imprisoned and is supervised by Uriel. So the abyss is 
also home to these guys, but also home to their disembodied offspring, the 
demons—disembodied giants who were killed. And again, this is familiar territory 
if you’ve read Unseen Realm or the Demons book. The main source here is 
Archie Wright, his book on the origin of evil spirits. You also get Wahlen’s book 
on unclean spirits that I reference in my Demons book. There’s just a truckload of 
material on this, going through Second Temple Jewish literature, to talk about the 
origin of demons being the disembodied spirits of the giants—the descendants of 
the Nephilim in that regard. You get the Rephaim show up in Sheol in Isaiah 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
14 
14:9. You’ve got a reference in Luke 8:31 which is kind of interesting. Let’s go to 
Luke 8:31 real quickly. This is the “Legion” episode. And the demons who are 
cast out by Jesus in verse 31: 
 
31 And they begged [Jesus] not to command them to depart into the abyss.  
 
Now if they just… It wouldn’t make any sense if they begged him not to [make 
them] depart to where they live. But specifically it’s the abyss. Okay? This is the 
prison. It’s not bad if you get sent home. It’s real bad if you get sent to the prison, 
because then you can’t get out. So again, there’s a reference… This is very 
consistent. The New Testament is part of the Second Temple environment. We 
all know this. But the literature is actually very consistent. This whole subject, by 
the way (where do demons come from, the imprisonment of the Watchers) is one 
of the very few subjects in Second Temple Jewish literature where basically all 
the texts agree. That is really unusual. But this is one where you’ve got 
overwhelming agreement on this issue.  
 
So again, you’ve got the Watchers in here. You’ve got demons in the realm of the 
dead, but specifically in the abyss (the prison). That’s a very specific group: it’s 
the offending Watchers. But Satan and these other dudes—these other rebels—
are in the realm of the dead, but the abyss is a special compartment in hell, as it 
were. Again, it’s a prison. So onto the way they’re characterized. As I wrote in 
Reversing Hermon: 
 
The bizarre description of the beings released from the Abyss as “locusts” 
(Revelation 9:3) that were “like horses prepared for battle: on their heads were 
what looked like crowns of gold; their faces were like human faces, their hair like 
women’s hair, and their teeth like lions’ teeth” (Revelation 9:7–8) does not 
undermine their identification as the fallen Watchers. Hybridized theriomorphic 
[MH: that’s an academic word that means “animal-shaped” or animal-like] 
descriptions applied to demonic spirits are common in ancient Jewish and 
classical literature. 
 
Again, this is just a way that supernatural evil spirits are described to try to 
convey their voraciousness, their violence, their ugliness, their freakishness—all 
these things. This is how writers would describe features and facets, character 
portraits. This is a profile. These are contributing elements to a profile of the 
nature of these beings. And so they use animal imagery. This is not uncommon.  
 
Now on the imagery, Beale and McDonough in the commentary on the New 
Testament use of the Old Testament note Old Testament connections to the 
appearance of these locusts, which textually there’s only one candidate: the 
fallen Watchers. Let me just say, it’s the fallen Watchers (and again the 
disembodied sprits of the Watchers are also in the same realm), but it’s the 
40:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
15 
Watchers that are not allowed to move. They’re not allowed out. Just so we’re 
clear on that. They write: 
 
The portrayal in 9:7–9 is based on Joel 1–2, which describes a plague of locusts 
devastating Israel’s land (cf. Jer. 51:27). The locust judgment in Joel 2 is 
introduced and concluded with the phrase [MH: get this] “sound the trumpet” 
(2:1, 15) [MH: is that ringing a bell?]. This judgment in Joel is modeled on the 
plague of locusts in Exod. 10... Jewish tradition held that in Sheol and Abaddon 
there were “angels of destruction,” who were in authority over thousands of 
scorpions… 
 
Again, that’s Jewish tradition—rabbinic stuff. Now we’re getting into Ginzberg: 
The Legends of the Jews. This is Beale and McDonough’s source. So this is 
rabbinic talk here. This is not Second Temple. It’s not Old Testament. Ginzberg 
notes that: 
 
The sting of the scorpions [MH: that were thought to be, in rabbinic tradition, in 
this place] was lethal (Ginzberg, Legends of the Jews, 1967: 1:11–16). However, 
some of the stings do not kill, but only torment the inhabitants of hell (Ginzberg 
1967: 2:312).” 
 
And if you have Ginzberg’s Legends of the Jews, that’s Volume 1, pages 11-16, 
and Volume 2, page 312. Now in Beale’s own commentary, not with McDonough, 
but Beale’s own commentary, he adds another thought. He says: 
 
Testament of Solomon 2:2–4 speaks of demons who have wings, fly, and resemble 
human-like lions. 
 
So there you get the lion teeth element. Now all of that hardly captures—it barely 
captures—the Old Testament antecedents. I’m going to read a long excerpt from 
Beale’s commentary. And even this is partial. I just want to give you a flavor of 
how much Old Testament backdrop imagery there is to the description of the 
released Watchers—these released supernatural prisoners that exist. I mean, 
there’s just a lot. There’s a truckload of stuff. And I’m doing this to telegraph the 
point that I already did at the beginning. We’re not talking about helicopters and 
surface-to-air missiles and lasers. We’re not talking about any of that. All of this 
stuff comes from the Old Testament somewhere. And even in Joel 1-2, the 
locusts, the sound of the trumpet… How much more explicit could it be? But here 
we go. Beale writes: 
 
In exercising this power the locusts execute judgment, as has already been 
intimated by their association with “smoke” (see on 9:2). Could Isa. 14:29, 31 also 
stand in the background [MH: this is the flying serpents], since it strikingly 
portrays an enemy who will oppress and “demoralize” (see below on 9:5–6) 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
16 
unbelieving Philistia as “a flying serpent” associated with “smoke”? The harmful 
nature of the judgment in Rev. 9:3 is also expressed by the description of the 
beings here as “locusts” going out “into the earth.” They are destructive as a 
swarm of locusts devouring all vegetation in their path. The wording of this 
expression is based on Exod. 10:12 (“let the locust come up on the land/earth”), 
which introduces the locust plague against Egypt. Therefore, the fifth trumpet is 
partly modeled literarily and thematically on the exodus plagues, as were the 
preceding trumpets... The locusts in Exod. 10:15 destroyed “the land and 
devoured the vegetation and all the fruit of the trees… [and] there was no green 
thing left on the trees” (so also Ps. 105:33–35). But the locusts here are 
commissioned “not to harm the grass of the earth or any green thing or any tree.” 
They are to harm only unbelievers, “those who do not have the seal of God on 
their foreheads” but have the “mark of the beast” “on the forehead” (13:16–17)... 
Deuteronomy 28 also predicts that “in the latter days” (so 32:20; 4:30) Israel will 
suffer the plagues of Egypt (vv 27, 60), including the plague of locusts (vv 38–39, 
42), because of idolatry (e.g., v 14; 29:22–27; 30:17; 31:16–20)... Detailed 
description is now given of the locusts. The use of “likeness” (homoiōma) and the 
repeated “like” (homoios) in vv 7–10 expresses the inability of John to describe 
precisely what he has seen [MH: he just says they’re “like” this or that]. The vision 
sparks in his mind similar scenes from the OT, as the following verses reveal, and 
his approximate portrayal of what he has seen is based on his understanding of 
how the vision relates to the OT prophetic tradition… 
 
The portrayal in vv 7–9 is based on Joel 1–2, which describes a plague of locusts 
devastating Israel’s land (whether the description there is literal or figurative for 
an invading army is not crucial for the present purposes). Just as here a trumpet 
has signaled the coming of the locusts (Rev. 9:1), so also in Joel 2 the locust 
judgment is introduced and concluded with “sound the trumpet” (2:1, 15). 
 
This judgment in Joel is itself modeled on the plague of locusts in Exodus 10 (note 
the clear allusions in Joel 1:2 and 2:2 [MH: compare those verses in Joel to] [Exod. 
10:6, 14]; 1:3 [MH: compare to] [Exod. 10:2]; 2:9 [MH: compare to] [Exod. 10:6]; 
2:27 [MH: compare to] [Exod. 10:2; 8:18, 22]). It is natural, therefore, that John 
uses Joel to supplement the description from Exodus already alluded to in vv 3–
5... The locusts are said to be “like horses prepared for battle.” It is hard to know 
if horses are only one metaphor for the locusts followed by others or whether all 
the pictures in vv 7–10 are part of a larger horse metaphor… But this ambiguity 
does not affect the overall meaning. The locusts (or horses) have “faces like 
human faces.” Similarly, Joel 2:4–7 describes the locusts there as “like the 
appearance of horses, and like war horses so they run … like a mighty people 
arranged for battle … like mighty men… like soldiers... “Iron breastplates” is a 
general description of part of the armor of a soldier (or battle horse; cf. Job 
39:19–20; Targ. Nah. 3:17 likens the scaled armor of Assyrian soldiers to the 
45:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
17 
scaled thoraxes of locusts). This may allude partly to Job 39:19–25 (LXX and MT), 
which describes a war horse going forth only at the “trumpet sound,” clothed “in 
terror” and “in perfect armor”… 
 
So now we have Job 39 using the trumpet language and the armor language, the 
“war horse,” and “who leaps” (this is also Job 39:19-25). These horses that are 
armored and go forth at the trumpet “leap like locusts.” 
 
“The sound of their [the locusts’] wings as the sound of chariots, of many horses 
running into battle” alludes to Joel 2:4–5: “their appearance is like the 
appearance of horses, and like war horses, so they run, like the sound of chariots 
they leap on the tops of the mountains… arranged for battle... Included likewise 
are echoes of Jer. 51:14, 27: “I will fill you with people like locusts, and they will 
cry out” (the targum has “troops of nations who are as many as the locust, and 
they will lift up their voice”); [MH: the Jeremiah 51 passage also uses the phrase] 
“Bring up the horses like bristly locusts.” This allusion is confirmed in that: (1) Jer. 
51:27 is introduced by [MH: again, here we have a third reference to] “sound the 
trumpet among the nations”… 
 
So we’ve got three references that associate locusts and trumpets from the Old 
Testament. Back to Beale: 
 
… in the same way that a trumpet has signaled the coming of the locusts here in 
Revelation [MH: you get these Old Testament passages doing it]. (2) The second 
trumpet (8:8–9) has already alluded to the burned out mountain cast into the sea 
from Jer. 51:25, 63–64, so that what we have here is a continuation of the earlier 
allusion.  
 
Let me just stop there. Beale is saying, “Look, the earlier trumpets used Jeremiah 
51. And this trumpet (#5) is using Jeremiah 51 as well for the locust stuff.” Back 
to Beale. The third observation he makes is: 
 
(3) The LXX of Jer. 51:27 [MH: and] (28:27 LXX) [MH: as well] is closer to 
Revelation than the Hebrew is: “bring up horses against her as a multitude of 
locusts.” The allusion reinforces the idea that the trumpet woes are directed to a 
significant degree against idolatrous persecutors outside the church, since Jer. 
51:14, 27 is an announcement of coming vindication for Israel against idolatrous 
Babylon [MH: catch that: “the context of Jeremiah 51 is Babylon…”] (51:10, 17–
18), who has wrongfully come against Israel and its temple (e.g., 51:11).” 
 
That’s Jeremiah 51:11. Now I’m going to just stop there. Now this is a fraction—
it’s a fraction—of what Beale has here. It’s probably over half. But still… Why go 
through all of this data? It might feel a little mind-numbing. Well, here’s why. If 
50:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
18 
you’re going to read this passage like it’s black helicopters, you might as well just 
throw out the Old Testament that John is using. Just throw it out.  
 
Let’s move to Revelation 9:13-21. And this is Trumpet 6, in the time we have left 
for today. So I’m going to go to Revelation 9 and read starting in verse 13: 
 
13 Then the sixth angel blew his trumpet, and I heard a voice from the four 
horns of the golden altar before God, 14 saying to the sixth angel who had the 
trumpet, “Release the four angels who are bound at the great river 
Euphrates.” 15 So the four angels, who had been prepared for the hour, the day, 
the month, and the year, were released to kill a third of mankind. 16 The 
number of mounted troops was twice ten thousand times ten thousand; I 
heard their number. 17 And this is how I saw the horses in my vision and those 
who rode them: they wore breastplates the color of fire and of sapphire and of 
sulfur, and the heads of the horses were like lions' heads, and fire and smoke 
and sulfur came out of their mouths. 18 By these three plagues a third of 
mankind was killed, by the fire and smoke and sulfur coming out of their 
mouths. 19 For the power of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails, for 
their tails are like serpents with heads, and by means of them they wound. 
 
20 The rest of mankind, who were not killed by these plagues, did not repent 
of the works of their hands nor give up worshiping demons and idols of gold 
and silver and bronze and stone and wood, which cannot see or hear or 
walk, 21 nor did they repent of their murders or their sorceries or their sexual 
immorality or their thefts. 
 
Basically they stayed unbelievers. They stayed hostile to the Lord. So some of 
this language has already been dealt with in the first part of Trumpet 5 with the 
description of the hordes that are released. Ultimately, what you’re going to have 
is, this describes the release of supernatural evil. There’s no more… The prison 
is emptied in the abyss for a short time. Ultimately, this is going to lead to a 
showdown. It is judgment. God uses them to judge the unbeliever on the earth. 
And it’s also going to lead to the big showdown in Revelation 20, which is going 
to be their ultimate doom. And that’s where everything is going to be wrapped up.  
 
So we don’t want to go back and rehearse all that. I want to pick a few things out 
of here that are different from the first part of Revelation 9. Essentially what you 
have described here is the prison is emptied, because now we’ve got all the 
players back on the chessboard. The final conflict is going to be a war between 
all of the supernatural forces of evil (and those humans that are loyal to them) 
against God. Okay? [laughs] Against Jesus. This sets up the ultimate showdown. 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
19 
It’s spiritual warfare in its ultimate… And the target is earth, because they’re 
going to surround Jerusalem and all this sort of stuff. So it’s the old “wars of gods 
and men” kind of thing going on here. And this is preparatory. So the prisons are 
emptied, everybody goes back on the chessboard, and now we’re going to end it. 
We’re going to have this one final showdown. So let’s just pick a few things of 
interest out here, in the rest of the [chapter]. 
 
Revelation 9:13 – the golden altar. Revelation 9:13 mentions this altar, which is 
an object already encountered in the book elsewhere. Aune has a quote here: 
 
The term thusiastērion [MH: which is the term translated “altar”] occurs eight 
times in Revelation, four of which refer to the heavenly counterpart of the 
Israelite [MH: earthly] incense altar (8:3[2x], 5; 9:13), and four to the heavenly 
counterpart of the altar of burnt offerings (6:9; 11:1; 14:18; 16:7) [MH: it could be 
either one]. Since it is explicitly said that the golden altar is “before God,” the 
voice from the four horns of the altar cannot be the voice of God. In 8:3–5 an 
angel functioning as a heavenly priest was depicted as standing by the golden 
altar, and it is possible that this unidentified voice could be his. 
 
So you have a portion of Revelation 9:13-21 hearkening back to some of these 
things. But the altar is new. But even that we’ve seen before with some of the 
heavenly furnishing and all that stuff. Because again, it’s the throne room of God. 
It’s temple and all this stuff, the heavenly temple, so on and so forth. So that’s the 
backdrop for that. Earlier back in Revelation 8 we talked about this. Revelation 6 
we also hit the altar. So you can go back and look at those episodes for more.  
 
Now Beale and McDonough comment about the rivers. We should say 
something about the rivers. 
 
That the four (presumably wicked) angels are held back at the “great river 
Euphrates” evokes the OT prophecy of a northern enemy beyond the Euphrates 
whom God would bring to judge sinful Israel… 
 
There’s a lot of reference to this. This is the “foe from the North” idea that I say 
something about in Unseen Realm. So you have Isaiah 7:20; 8:7–8; 14:29–31; 
Jeremiah 1:14–15; 4:6–13; 6:1, 22; 10:22; 13:20; Ezekiel 38:6, 15; 39:2. Joel 
2:1–11 is part of the “enemy from the North.” And it’s not just the geographical 
north, if you recall, if you’ve read Unseen Realm. It’s the cosmic north. It’s 
tzaphon. This was the domain of Baal. This was where Baal and his council 
were. This is language… The tzaphon/saphon language of the Old Testament 
relates not just to human warriors coming down from the Fertile Crescent to 
wreak havoc in real time (all these invading armies that Israel had to put up with), 
but it’s also the idea that there are cosmic powers to the north. (Think of where 
Ugarit is and you get the image, and Baal’s mountain.) So it’s cosmic evil comes 
55:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
20 
from the “North,” the supernatural North, the celestial North, if you will. So this is 
what’s in view here. Back to Beale and McDonough, they also write: 
 
In both cases [MH: this “North” in either scenario] the invaders were 
characterized as a terrifying army on horses/chariots arising from the north (Isa. 
5:26–29; Jer. 4:6–13; 6:1, 22; 46–47; 50:41–42; Ezek. 26:7–11; 38:6, 15; 39:2; 
Hab. 1:8–9… The echoes of Jer. 46 are especially strong [MH: in this part of 
Revelation 9]... The description of the creatures in the sixth trumpet echoes Job’s 
portrait of the sea dragon, the symbol of cosmic evil (Job 40–41). This enhances 
the identification of these creatures with Satan and his deceptive work. 
 
So they’re talking there about the serpentine imagery with the horses’ tails—very 
consistent with the sea dragon idea, which is Leviathan. It’s cosmic evil. It’s 
chaos. So while it’s clear that the hordes here are demonic, that conclusion 
should not be used to eliminate the possibility of human armies. Like I said 
before, you’ve really got both going on. Now I’m going to disagree with Aune 
here, but I want to quote him just to give you sort of a flavor for what some do 
with this. He says: 
 
[The army of ten thousands of ten thousands] appears to be a demonic rather 
than a human army. Huge armies of destroying angels (though not this large) are 
twice mentioned in the Babylonian Talmud. In b. Šabb. 88a, it is said that 1.2 
million angels of destruction punished the Israelites who sinned in the golden calf 
incident. 
 
Well, obviously, there’s nothing in the Bible about that. It’s just Jewish rabbis 
making stuff up. But again, you get the idea. Aune is saying this is a demonic 
army. I would say that an entirely demonic army would be inconsistent with 
Revelation 20:7-10. Now see, there’s the Revelation 20 connection back to 
Revelation 9. Why do I say that? Let’s just read Revelation 20. Because I’m 
going to argue that what’s being articulated here is a release of the Watchers; 
you put all the pieces back on the chessboard; and this is an essential element. 
Yep, they’re going to wreak havoc. Because this is God. God is ultimately going 
to use them to judge those who have the mark of the beast and so on and so 
forth. But that’s just the set-up. That’s window dressing. Okay? It is like the 
plagues in that respect, but it’s going to lead to an ultimate showdown at 
Jerusalem, for everything. And that’s going to involve both supernatural forces 
and human forces. Because that’s what Revelation 20 has. So it says: 
 
7 And when the thousand years are ended, Satan will be released from his 
prison 8 and will come out to deceive the nations that are at the four corners of 
the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them for battle; their number is like the 
sand of the sea. 9 And they marched up over the broad plain of the earth and 
1:00:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
21 
surrounded the camp of the saints [MH: the holy ones] and the beloved city 
[MH: obviously Jerusalem], but fire came down from heaven and consumed 
them, 10 and the devil who had deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire 
and sulfur where the beast and the false prophet were, and they will be 
tormented day and night forever and ever. 
 
Now that description… Just think about it. In Revelation 20:8, instead of “myriads 
upon myriads” and “thousands of ten thousands,” you have the more familiar 
description, “like the sand of the sea.” And that coincides with the language of 
Revelation 9. But in Revelation 20:7-10 that we just read, we have nations 
deceived and Jerusalem being surrounded. That description has all the marks of 
an earthly army. Revelation 20:10 has the devil deceiving this force, so the army 
must (at least in part, and I would say perhaps substantially) be understood as 
human enemies and warriors. The point is that demons don’t need to be 
deceived to march against Jerusalem. That doesn’t make any sense. So I think 
what we have here is both. We’ve got both going on, back to the old “war of gods 
and men” that the final apocalyptic conflict/Armageddon kind of thing…  
 
And I know if you’re into prophecy you’re thinking, “Well, Mike, you’re confused. 
It’s Revelation 20:10, it’s after the millennium. And Armageddon’s before that.” 
Okay, that’s what a theological system tells you. If you want more information on 
Ezekiel 38 and stuff like this, go back to the series on Ezekiel and look up the 
episodes on Ezekiel 38 and 39. Again, there are things in Revelation 20 that 
occur earlier in the book of Revelation and that attach to Ezekiel 38 and 39, 
namely Gog and Magog. And at least in this portion of Ezekiel, or with these 
elements, this is not a linear chronology. It is a reiterative cycling through of the 
same events. So I‘m not confused. I’m just not following a theological system. 
What we have here is a description of the characters, things that are going to be 
taking shape in two different passages. When we get later in the book of 
Revelation, you’re going to see how these things cycle through and mirror each 
other. There are things (just to telegraph it) in Revelation 8 and 9 and 13 and 17 
and 20 that are basically the same. And this is where we get what’s called “the 
recapitulation view of Revelation,” where we don’t have a linear chronology of 
events in Revelation. We have some linear chronology. I mean, there is a 
progression. But we also have events that are described in cycles. Describe an 
event with five or six motifs; and then the same event five or six motifs, maybe 
you add another one, gets done later; and then it cycles through a third time and 
a fourth time. It’s like loops. It’s like a Ferris wheel. They’re connected. It’s not 
linear. It’s repeated cycles of the same thing. That does happen in the book of 
Revelation. And if you’re used to interpreting Revelation as only a linear 
chronology, you never even run into that idea because you’ve been taught not to 
see it, because you’ve been taught to approach the book as a linear chronology 
only. And again, that’s why you have the theological system you do, and why 
somebody else has the theological system they do. I don't care about systems. 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
22 
All I care about is how these things hook back into the Old Testament. And the 
passages do bounce off each other.  
 
And ultimately, we have a much greater amount of clarity if we take Armageddon 
not as a conflict over Megiddo sometime during the “great tribulation,” maybe or 
maybe not Armageddon… Throw all that out. If you understand Armageddon as 
a war for Jerusalem, because it’s the Hebrew tongue har magedon, har mo-ed 
(the mount of assembly, the place where God dwells and where God’s council 
is)… This is Zion. This is Zion theology from the Old Testament back and forth 
and three times over. If you understand it that way, then you can see how some 
of these things repeat. And it doesn’t really matter if we understand all the 
repetitions. What matters is, all of this is building to the climax for Zion. It’s a war 
between supernatural forces and human forces for God’s holy city, for Zion, for 
Jerusalem. That is what the book leads to—this conflict.  
 
So again, you can clean up a lot of the clutter that systems develop and all this 
presumed precision of events and linear chronology (most of that just doesn’t 
work) if you’re looking back at the Old Testament. Because these passages that 
recycle hook into the same Old Testament passages. Again, that’s another clue 
that John is using. In this case, what does he use? He uses Joel 1-2; he uses 
Jeremiah 51; Jeremiah 56; a couple of other things in smaller ways. But he’s 
going to use these passages again elsewhere. And he’s already used them in 
some places. Exodus imagery… we’ll see some more of that. John is using a 
fairly small set of Old Testament passages and he keeps dipping into them to 
describe the same series of events. That’s what he’s doing here. That’s why you 
see him dipping into the same passages. He’s not dipping into them to say 
something different. And if it’s a linear chronology, why would he keep going 
back to the stuff he’s already alluded to?  
 
So again, I don't want to drift into system analysis here and all of that, but I know 
there are going to be some in the audience that just think when I’m talking about 
Revelation 20 and I hook that into Armageddon, that I’m hopelessly confused. 
No, actually, I’m not. I’m just not following a system. So I just wanted to add that.  
 
So we’re going to end here. There’s more that we could say, but this brings us 
really in Old Testament terms to the end of Revelation 9. So next time we’re 
going to hit Revelation 10. And again, we are through six trumpets now. There’s 
one to go. But there’s obviously other things that are going to pop up here in the 
book. And we’re going to just keep doing the same thing: what John’s doing has 
deep Old Testament antecedents, and so what are they and what might they 
indicate? In this case, it’s both demonic imagery (it’s imagery that he and other 
writers used for supernatural evil beings) but it also doesn’t exclude (in fact I 
would say in some respects it certainly would include) human armies as well. 
And if you think back to the Deuteronomy 32 worldview, this is the way things 
work. The human enemies of God (the human empires against God’s people) are 
1:05:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                           
 
     Episode 377: Revelation 9 
 
23 
being controlled and manipulated, they are under dominion, they are under 
judgment, they are being held captive—enslaved—by supernatural “princes” (to 
use Daniel’s language in Daniel 10) but that language is drawn from 
Deuteronomy 32 (the judgment at Babel). If you’ve read Unseen Realm, this is all 
familiar to you. If you haven’t, you need to go read the book, just to get up to 
speed here. But with that, we’re going to end here. And on to Revelation 10. 
 
TS: Yeah, when I first learned to not read Revelation in a linear fashion, that was 
a big concept for me. 
 
MH: It was for me. Because I was taught the other way very, very thoroughly. I 
think you get both in the book, but the important thing is not to assume the linear 
approach. Because you’re just going to run into places where it’s not really a 
good way to go.  
 
TS: And you also referenced Justin Bass, who we’re going to have on our show 
here several weeks from now. But we do plan on interviewing him! 
 
MH: Yeah, we’re looking forward to that and doing some other things. You know, 
we’ll dip back into his book, maybe with the keys a little bit. But he’s done some 
other things, too, we want to talk about. 
 
TS: Alright, Mike. With that I want to thank everybody for listening to the Naked 
Bible Podcast! God Bless.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

---PAGE---
