Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
1 
Naked Bible Podcast Transcript 
Episode 434 
The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
July 17, 2022 
 
Teacher: Dr. Michael S. Heiser (MH) 
Host: Trey Stricklin (TS) 
 
Episode Summary 
 
In Jude 6 the author introduces his readers to a group of angels that sinned 
against God. They failed to “stay within their own position of authority, but left 
their proper dwelling.” As a result, these angels are “kept in eternal chains under 
gloomy darkness until the judgment of the great day.” The verse is both clear and 
yet raises many questions. In this episode, we take a look at the angelic sin of 
Jude 6 and its textual relationship to both 2 Peter 2:4 and the book of 1 Enoch. 
Doing so produces clarity for understanding to what Old Testament event Jude 
alludes and why he injects it into his condemnation of false teachers. 
 
 
Transcript 
 
TS:  Welcome to the Naked Bible Podcast, Episode 434:  The Epistle of Jude, 
Part 3. I’m the layman, Trey Stricklin, and he’s the scholar, Dr. Michael Heiser. 
Hey, Mike! What’s going on? 
MH:  Oh, not a whole lot. We are through Stranger Things though. 
TS:  Yeah. 
MH:  I figured you would be asking that. 
TS:  Mm-hmm. And your thoughts? 
MH:  Uh, I would say I thought it was good, but not quite at the level of the first 
three seasons. 
TS:  Okay. 
MH:  I kind of judge these things by how many memorable scenes there are and 
different things like that. But without giving away any spoilers, the scene with 
Murray in the last installment in the Russian prison was the best one. But, I 
mean, it was good. It was good. It’s just a hard act to follow. The first three 
seasons were so good. 
5:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
2 
TS:  Yeah, I’m going to say Eddie shredding the guitar was my favorite scene. I 
enjoyed him. He was a good addition to the season, so that was fun. 
MH:  Yeah, yeah, well, again, without… We don’t want to do any spoilers here. 
TS:  Yeah. 
MH:  But my kids thought he was a good addition, too. 
TS:  Yeah, yeah, the whole Hellfire Club was funny. That D&D… See what’s 
funny is I remember that. In the 80s, I was a kid. I was their age as a kid at that 
time and I didn’t play Dungeons and Dragons because I, too, heard it was satanic 
and I was scared of it and I didn’t know anything about the game and we didn’t 
have the internet back then. We had three channels on TV and things like that, 
so for the longest time I really thought it was some kind of satanic Ouija board 
game or something. 
MH:  Yeah. 
TS:  So that’s funny. 
MH:  Right and not just for geeks, yeah. 
TS:  Yeah, so that whole… In the show, when the jock thought they were devil 
demon worshippers or whatever and they’re playing the game. So I was like, 
that’s spot on. That’s exactly what the mentality was at the time, and I remember 
thinking that way as well as a kid. They nailed that part of it. 
MH:  I remember hearing… Yeah, I remember hearing that, but I mean I never 
played it either. But it didn’t get too much hype where I was at school, but I know 
there were kids that played it. But you’d hear every now and then something like 
that, yeah. 
TS:  Yeah, yeah, taking it a little too serious. Well, you know, Jude is going to be 
way better than D&D game. I mean with how much is packed into this little letter. 
MH:  Yeah, yeah, and today, I mean, Jude 6 is almost like its own Hellfire Club, 
too [laughter]. Well, today we are going to hit Jude 6. I’m actually going to spend 
some time in verse 8 as well, but the next time we’ll hit verses 7 and 8. It’s just 
kind of hard to know what to split up and what to sort of focus on in this book 
because it’s so compact. I don’t know, it kind of presents some difficulties 
because the writer kind of assumes things of his audience that I’m just 
wondering, can we assume today that we all know about this or that? Especially 
like the book of Enoch. We’re going to spend time talking about Enoch today 
again, too. But, yeah, Jude 6 for the most part today. We might as well just start it 
off by reading. I’m going to read verses 4-8, but we’ll focus on verse 6 with the 
angels that sin. So beginning in verse 4. It says: 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
3 
4 For certain people have crept in unnoticed who long ago were designated for 
this condemnation, ungodly people, who pervert the grace of our God into 
sensuality and deny our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ. 
 
5 Now I want to remind you, although you once fully knew it, that Jesus, who 
saved a people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who did 
not believe. 6 And the angels who did not stay within their own position of 
authority, but left their proper dwelling, he has kept in eternal chains under 
gloomy darkness until the judgment of the great day— 7 just as Sodom and 
Gomorrah and the surrounding cities, which likewise indulged in sexual 
immorality and pursued unnatural desire, serve as an example by undergoing a 
punishment of eternal fire. 
 
8 Yet in like manner these people also, relying on their dreams, defile the flesh, 
reject authority, and blaspheme the glorious ones.  
That’s Jude 4-8 and, again, it’s not an easy task to know kind of how to split 
these things out because verses 6 and 8 sort of play off each other and we don’t 
have enough time in this episode to hit 6, 7 and 8. So we’re going to reserve the 
Sodom and Gomorrah verse (verse 7) and pick up again with verse 8 next time. 
But we’re going to try to focus on Jude 6. And I’ve already telegraphed it. We’re 
going to get into verse 8 because verse 8 is something of a commentary on 
verse 6 in some ways.  
So if we go to Jude 6, we focus here on the angels who did not stay within their 
own position of authority, but left their proper dwelling. Jude is comparing the 
false teachers of verse 4 (where we began our reading) and their fate to Old 
Testament typologies. We discussed that in chapter 2—that Jude is going to be 
pulling out different events, different personages, different figures from the Old 
Testament as analogous to the false teachers, again, to make his point that their 
doom is certain. They’re not going to get away with anything that they’ve been 
trying to get away with, and he’s going to use a variety of Old Testament events 
and characters to try to illustrate this. So he is comparing the false teachers of 
verse 4 to the angels that sinned, and then he’s going to compare them to 
Sodom and Gomorrah. A little later it will be Balaam and Cain and Korah. So 
Jude is going to do a lot of this (to paint the false teachers in a certain way) and, 
by analogy… What they’re guilty of by analogy [audio breaks up]. 
We will also be dipping into 2 Peter 2 a little bit today to discuss this, which is 
unavoidable. Listeners are likely aware that 2 Peter 2:4 has the same sort of 
content in view as in Jude 6—the angels that sinned. They are also probably 
aware that the epistles of 2 Peter and Jude have a close content relationship. But 
in case not, I don’t know if this article is publicly accessible or not, but I think it 
10:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
4 
actually is because it’s a BBR title (Bulletin for Biblical Research). This is J. Daryl 
Charles, “The Angels Under Reserve in 2 Peter and Jude,” and this is from a 
2005 issue (way back), Volume 15. And what he points out in regard to this 
relationship between Jude and 2 Peter… He writes: 
 
In Jewish tradition the example of the disenfranchised angels (Jude 6 and 2 Peter 
2:4) appears frequently alongside hard-hearted Israel (Jude 5), Sodom and 
Gomorrah (Jude 7 and 2 Peter 2:6), and Noah and the flood in extrabiblical 
tradition. 
So basically, what he’s saying is, just broadly in Jewish tradition (not just the New 
Testament, but broadly), you see these things lumped together—the angels that 
sinned, Sodom and Gomorrah, hard-hearted Israel, the flood. It’s common for 
ancient Jewish books of the period to get into this content and mix all this stuff 
because of sort of the crime and punishment that was involved and also the 
whole story of the Watchers. The Watchers were guilty of false teaching. That 
was one of the main things that they were guilty of. Again, I’m assuming that this 
audience is going to know who the Watchers are and they’re going to know the 
basics of the Enoch story, so I’m not going to just rehearse all that. I’m assuming 
people have read Unseen Realm and have dipped into this content before. But 
again, Charles is just saying that this is really common to lump all these things 
together in Jewish literature in that period. He says: 
 
Stereotypically, these are employed as types of apostasy upon which divine 
judgment fell. The angels function in what appear to be similar contexts, since the 
theme of moral accountability is present in both 2 Peter and Jude. 
So again, these two epistles in the New Testament are closely related, and so 2 
Peter 2:4 and Jude 6 are both going to be dealing with angels that sinned. 
They’re not identical in everything they say, but you put them together and you 
get the full picture. And you can get even a fuller picture if you start factoring in 
the ancient Jewish literature that both Jude and Peter know and they reference in 
their epistles, in what they’re writing. 
Bauckham, in his commentary on Jude, gets into the details of Jude 6. So I want 
to include some quotations from scholars in this regard because I don’t want 
anybody to think this is just Mike’s take on Jude 6 or the angels that sinned going 
back to Genesis 6:1-4. No, this is standard academic research going into 2 Peter 
2 and Jude 6. I mean, anybody who spends any amount of time in the material is 
going to know that both these New Testament writers, Peter and Jude, are very, 
very closely acquainted with Enoch and Enoch’s story of the episode of the sons 
of God in Genesis 6:1-4. Of course, the sons of God in Enoch’s version are 
referred to as Watchers. That’s the Second Temple Jewish name for these 
villains—these characters. So Bauckham gets into the details, and let me just 
quote from what he says in his Word Biblical Commentary. He says: 
15:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
5 
ἀλλέλους are the angels (known as the Watchers) who, according to Jewish 
tradition, descended from heaven to marry human wives and corrupt the human 
race in the period before the Flood. This was how the account of the “sons of 
God” in Gen 6:1–4 was universally understood (so far as our evidence goes) until 
the mid-second century A.D. (1 Enoch 6–19; 21; 86–88; 106:13–15, 17; Jub. 4:15, 
22; 5:1; CD 2:17–19; 1QapGen 2:1; Tg. Ps.-J. Gen. 6:1–4; T. Reub. 5:6–7; T. Napht. 
3:5; 2 Apoc. Bar. 56:10–14)…  
There’s a wide variety of Second Temple Jewish literature where you find this 
story. And again, there’s no ambiguity here. Up until the second century A.D., 
everybody understood that the sons of God of Genesis 6 were supernatural 
beings, angelic beings. There was no Sethite view, none of that nonsense that 
you run into so frequently in the church today—nobody in antiquity up until well 
into the 200s A.D., a couple hundred years after the birth of the Early Church. 
They all knew what this was. They all knew what it was talking about and did not 
run away from it. So Bauckham writes… picking up with him again: 
 
Jude’s reference is directly dependent on 1 Enoch 6–19, which is the earliest 
extant account of the fall of the Watchers (from the early second century B.C. at 
the latest: Milik, Enoch, 22–25, 28, 31), and he shows himself closely familiar with 
those chapters. They tell how, in the days of Jared (Gen 5:18), two hundred 
angels under the leadership of Šemiḥazah and ʿAśa’el, filled with lust for the 
beautiful daughters of men, descended on Mount Hermon and took human 
wives. Their children, the giants, ravaged the earth, and the fallen angels taught 
men forbidden knowledge and all kinds of sin. They were therefore responsible 
for the total corruption of the world on account of which God sent the Flood. The 
Watchers were punished by being bound under the earth until the Day of 
Judgment, when they will be cast into Gehenna. Their children, the giants, were 
condemned to destroy each other in battle (10:9), but their spirits became the 
evil spirits responsible for all evil in the world between the Flood and the Day of 
Judgment (15:8–16:1). It is clear that for the author of these chapters the 
judgment of the Watchers and men at the time of the Flood prefigured the final 
elimination of all evil at the Last Judgment. The parallel will also have been in 
Jude’s mind when he used the Watchers as a type of the false teachers of the last 
days. 
It's very clear that Jude, when he refers to the angels (very clear—angels that 
sinned), Jude clearly accepts the sons of God of Genesis 6:1-4 as supernatural 
beings. And there’s simply no escape from this other than to simply ignore the 
text at this point or to make up some other angelic sin and then add it to the Old 
Testament. You get to create your own scripture. And I don’t want to sound too 
flippant there, but I don’t mind sounding at least a little bit flippant because that’s 
essentially what people do. They come up with this third of the angels revolting 
and all that sort of stuff. There is no account of this—of a third of the angels 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
6 
rebelling in the Old Testament—zero. It shows up nowhere. The only time you 
get that language is Revelation 12 and it’s about a war in heaven in response to 
the birth of the Christ child. It has nothing to do with the events before the Flood. 
Again, these are the facts of the text. If you just don’t like it, well that’s too bad 
because that’s just the way it is. These are the facts of the text, and everybody in 
the ancient world knew this. They didn’t try to run from it or hide from it. So Jude 
clearly accepts that the sons of God of Genesis 6:1-4 were supernatural beings. 
He calls them angels. 
There’s an explicit parallel in 2 Peter 2:4-6, and that includes both angels that 
sinned before the Flood came and Sodom and Gomorrah also, as Old Testament 
analogies to false teachers, just like Jude. All scholars (and I’m serious about 
this) are aware of the tight overlap between Jude and 2 Peter and these things. 
There is no ambiguity here. Nobody’s wondering how to take these things. This is 
one of the few things in scripture where there is consensus agreement because, 
frankly, the content is so obvious. 
In the 2 Peter 2 reference, the sin of the angels doesn’t get much of a 
description. In fact, let’s just go there real quickly. We’ll go to 2 Peter 2:4. I’ll read 
it just in case it’s not in the minds of listeners. 2 Peter 2:4: 
 
 
4 For if God did not spare angels when they sinned, but cast them into hell… 
And the verb there is tartarus, tartaroo (cast them into tartarus is the verb). And 
tartarus was the place where the Titans of Greek religion wound up in response 
to their rebellion. 
 
 
4 For if God did not spare angels when they sinned, but cast them into 
tartarus [MH: the ESV has “cast them into hell”] and committed them to 
chains of gloomy darkness to be kept until the judgment; 5 if he did not spare 
the ancient world, but preserved Noah, a herald of righteousness, with seven 
others, when he brought a flood upon the world of the ungodly; 6 if by turning 
the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to ashes he condemned them to 
extinction, making them an example of what is going to happen to the 
ungodly;  
So on and so forth. So that’s 2 Peter 2:4-7. It reads just like Jude 6-8. You get 
the same thematic elements there—the angels that sinned, Sodom and 
Gomorrah… Of course, you have the timing with the Flood there, and so on and 
so forth. So again, scholars are very aware that 2 Peter 2 and Jude 6; specifically 
2 Peter 2:4 and Jude 6 are very close in terms of their content. But in 2 Peter 2, 
we don’t really get a specific description of the sin. We do get a description, 
however, of the sensuality of the false teachers that both precedes and follows. 
The description of the false teachers in 2 Peter 2 are described that way in 2 
20:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
7 
Peter 2:1-2 and 2 Peter 2:9-10. There’s something about their character that has 
something to do with sexual immorality and that theme is more pronounced in the 
Jude passage. Again, going back to Jude 6, our verse for the day: 
 
6 And the angels who did not stay within their own position of authority, but 
left their proper dwelling, he has kept in eternal chains under gloomy darkness 
until the judgment of the great day—  
You get down to verse 8 and it talks about defiling the flesh. Verse 7 talks about 
Sodom and Gomorrah “likewise,” like the angels who sinned, indulged in sexual 
immorality, so on and so forth—unnatural desire. So there’s something about that 
element in both Jude and 2 Peter that sort of works its way into the description. 
In some cases, it is more overt than others. In 2 Peter 2:4, you get specifically a 
reference to sensuality. Let’s just go back there. 
 
4 For if God did not spare angels when they sinned, but cast them into hell 
[Tartarus] and committed them to chains of gloomy darkness to be kept until 
the judgment;  
Again, so on and so forth with Sodom and Gomorrah. You get this situation 
where in verse 7: 
 
7 and if he rescued righteous Lot, greatly distressed by the sensual conduct of 
the wicked… 
You get these references to sensuality and then the whole Sodom and Gomorrah 
episode as well. Then you get the angels that sinned, again, casting them into 
Tartarus. And then in Jude 6: 
 
6 And the angels who did not stay within their own position of authority, 
7 just as Sodom and Gomorrah and the surrounding cities, which likewise 
indulged in sexual immorality… 
Again, it’s just a recurring theme throughout, and that makes sense in light of 
Genesis 6:1-4. Okay, Genesis 6:1-4—the sons of God and the daughters of 
men—again, a forbidden transgressive relationship there that results in the 
Nephilim and the giants and so on and so forth. And all of these details of the 
story get amplified—get blown up—in the book of Enoch in lots of detail. But this 
is part of the important context which is just inescapable, as far as this element of 
it. And again, it makes sense because it’s referencing Genesis 6:1-4. There is no 
other angelic sin that would’ve involved any sort of sexual immorality or any 
language like that back in the Old Testament except for Genesis 6:1-4. There just 
isn’t any. I want to spend a little bit more time on this specifically in 2 Peter 2:7. 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
8 
Not to belabor the point too much, but I want… The reason I’m doing this is to 
reinforce the reality that there is no angelic sin that has something to do with 
sexual immorality other than Genesis 6:1-4. This is the only thing that Peter could 
have in his head when he was writing this. 
So if you go to 2 Peter 2:7, again, this is going to be consistent with what we’re 
reading in Jude. When you get to the Sodom and Gomorrah story in verse 7 in 2 
Peter 2: 
 
7 and if he rescued righteous Lot, greatly distressed by the sensual conduct of 
the wicked… 
Sensual conduct there is a Greek term, aselgeia, and the term is very clear. 
BDAG (which is the standard lexicon for New Testament study) defines that the 
term is just generally: 
 
lack of self-constraint which involves one in conduct that violates all bounds of 
what is socially acceptable, self-abandonment; live licentiously 
And of 2 Peter 2, BDAG has that specifically referenced here as “many will follow 
in their licentious tracks,” and he has some notes from other passages as well. 
The term is used in the New Testament in Romans 13:13 with koitē. We get our 
word “coitus” from it (a reference to the sexual act), and it’s also used elsewhere 
with porneia or some of these “porn” root terms in the New Testament. So it’s 
very clear that what we have here has something to do with… Again, there’s 
sexual flavor to it, a sexual content to it. 
Another source, the New International Dictionary of New Testament Theology 
and Exegesis notes of this term (of aselgeia) that it means licentiousness, 
lewdness, indecency. And specifically, the contributor there writes this: 
 
In the LXX ἀσέλγεια occurs only twice, both times in the Apoc. (3 Macc 2:26 [of 
Ptolemy’s dissolute behavior]; Wis 14:26 [with μοιχεία [moicheia] G3657, 
“adultery,” and other terms dealing with sexual immorality]). The term is used by 
Jos. 10×, in some instances of intemperate behavior generally (e.g., A.J. 
[Antiquities of the Jews] 8.252), but other times with ref. to sexual conduct (e.g., 
B.J. [Wars of the Jews] 2.121). Philo uses it 3×… 
I’m not going to go through all these references, but Second Temple Jewish 
literature uses this term in the Greek material there to refer to licentious behavior 
of a sexual nature. So the word, going down the entry here in NIDNTTE the 
contributor notes this: 
 
The word occurs 10× in the NT, all but one instance (Mark 7:22) being found in 
the Epistles…. The general meaning “lack of moral restraint” is poss. in Mark 7:22 
25:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
9 
(in a list next to “deceit” and “envy”) and Eph 4:19 (unless the presence of 
ἀκαθαρσία G174 in the context indicates otherwise), but in every other passage 
the term is found either next to words that explicitly refer to sexual immorality 
(Rom 13:13; 2 Cor 12:21; Gal 5:19; 1 Pet 4:3 [here perhaps “profligacy”]; 2 Pet 
2:18) or in contexts that indicate the same (2 Pet 2:7, 18 [cf. vv. 13–14]; Jude 4 
[cf. vv. 7–8]). 
But again, I’m belaboring this point because you have people that still, especially 
within evangelicalism, try to approach Jude 6 (the angels who sinned) and 2 
Peter 2:4 (again, angels who sinned) and try to come up with it referring to 
something other than Genesis 6:1-4. I’m sorry, but it can’t be done. It’s the only 
sin of a group of angels just generally in the entire Old Testament, and it’s the 
only sin of a group of angels more specifically that has some kind of sexual 
content to it. There’s only one candidate. It’s Genesis 6:1-4. 
So let’s get back into Jude. Again, I don’t want to belabor it too much, but people 
just deny it. They don’t want Peter, they don’t want Jude (again, for our purposes 
today) to be affirming Genesis 6:1-4 as supernatural beings, but he does. Sorry. 
He just does. So the Peter parallel is important, I think, ultimately because of 
verse 8, which in Jude 8 we read this: 
 
8 Yet in like manner these people [MH: these false teachers] also, relying on 
their dreams, defile the flesh, reject authority, and blaspheme the glorious 
ones.  
So what Jude does is he betrays the false teachers in three ways: they defile the 
flesh, they reject authority, and they blaspheme the glorious ones. But he has 
this phrase that they do this in like manner. “Likewise…” to what?  Well, to (this is 
Jude 8) what has preceded, that is, the angels that sinned and then, of course, 
the Sodom and Gomorrah story. So the “defile the flesh” line in verse 8 in Jude 8 
and earlier… Again, the relationship between Jude 6 and 2 Peter 2:4 and the 
sexual context there… I think if we view all these things together (Jude 6, Jude 8, 
2 Peter 2:4, 2 Peter 2:7), we get a fuller picture of not only how the writers are 
portraying the false teachers (and again, their false teaching has something to do 
with sexual immorality and just corrupting people that way), but it also provides a 
real strong foothold back to Genesis 6:1-4.  
So I’m going to camp a little bit on verse 8, even though our focus is the angels 
that sinned in Jude 6, because I think verse 8 allows us to interpret verse 6 a little 
bit better. So let’s just do that. Jude 8 essentially describes the sin of the angels 
and of Sodom and Gomorrah three ways. I’ll mention it again: defilement of the 
flesh, rejection of authority, blaspheming the glorious ones. So what I’m going to 
suggest is that these elements… We’ve already talked about the defilement of 
the flesh, and we’re not going to rabbit-trail back into that. But other than the 
sexual nature of the sin, there are two other things going on here that we can 
30:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
10 
take back to Genesis 6:1-4 or we can take back to Jude 6 (and even into 2 Peter 
2) and talk about what this original crime was. It wasn’t just the sexual 
transgression; there was more going on here. 
So by rejecting authority it has something to do with a hunger for autonomy—the 
angels resisting the authority of God over them. And, of course, in Sodom and 
Gomorrah’s case, the cities have already rejected God’s will for general behavior 
approved by God. We know that from the story, and we’ll cover the Sodom and 
Gomorrah story next time. But Genesis 18 makes that clear. There’s nobody 
righteous in the city so they’ve clearly rejected God’s morality in every way. And 
then, not only have they rejected the authority of God over them, but they also 
blaspheme the glorious ones. And I think it helps us to see a little bit more of 
what is going on and how the transgression of Genesis 6:1-4 was understood 
and how we can be reading the angelic sin of Jude 6 a little bit differently too. 
There’s something blasphemous going on here, where the angels that sinned 
blaspheme God and they diminish the loyalty of the rest of the heavenly host. 
They essentially snub their noses at God and those who are on God’s side. And 
of course, in Sodom and Gomorrah’s case (as we’ll find out next time), the 
connection point there may very well be that the men of the city of Sodom 
desired to sexually take the two men who are actually angels in the story. And 
that may be the way that the glorious ones are blasphemed, but we’ll hit that next 
time. 
Let’s take this all back to Jude 6. 
 
6 And the angels who did not stay within their own position of authority, but 
left their proper dwelling, 
I mean, you look at that description: “They didn’t stay within their position of 
authority.” Well, that sounds like they’re rejecting authority in verse 8. Again, in 
verse 6 and verse 8 there is some relationship there, “and they left their proper 
dwelling.” Again, that’s a rejection of authority. Then what I am also going to 
suggest to you is that it does have something to do with blasphemy as well. The 
rest of verse 6 (factoring verse 8 into the description of the sin), what did the 
angels do? Well, they don’t stay within their own position of authority. The Greek 
term there is archē. They don’t stay within their own arche, which generally 
means “rule,” but they left their proper dwelling. The Greek word there is 
oikētērion. They leave home, essentially, which amounts to rejecting the authority 
put over them in verse 8. They reject the lordship that is put over them (the 
Greek word there is kyriotēs) and they wind up “blaspheming the glorious ones” 
there at the end of verse 8. 
So I want to take each one of these element by element and you’ll just see some 
of the details that emerged from this. Again, what we’re doing is we’re comparing 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
11 
Jude 6… We’re allowing Jude 8 to be a bit of a commentary on it, and also we’re 
looping in 2 Peter 2 and, of course, Genesis 6:1-4. So let’s take the first one. 
1. “Did not stay within their own position of authority” (here in Jude 8).  
They didn’t stay within their own archē, their own rule. Herb Bateman in his 
commentary has a nice summary paragraph of this I’m going to read to you. He 
says: 
 
The noun “domain” (ἀρχὴν, archēn) [MH: the ESV has “authority”] could mean 
they were authority figures or cosmic rulers [MH: again, the word is archē]. For 
instance, one Dead Sea Scroll states, “peace and blessing for the lot of God, to 
exalt the authority of Michael among the gods and the dominion of Israel among 
all flesh” (1QM 17.7–8 [MH: the War Scroll]; cf. 1 En. 82:10–20; 1QM 10.12). 
Naturally, Michael is the archangel who appears later, in Jude 9. The point here is 
simply this: an angel is given authority or “position of authority” (CEB). In fact, the 
NT speaks of angelic principalities and powers (Rom 8:38; Col 2:15). This is not to 
say that there was a civil war in heaven and angels were cast out, 
Again, that’s good because the Old Testament doesn’t record that anywhere. So 
he’s saying it’s not to say that. 
 
…but rather that they left on their own accord as a form of rebellion against God. 
Thus the term might mean angels did not keep their office or position of 
rulership. Yet Jude’s parallelism seems to suggest that these celestial beings did 
not stay within their sphere of official activity, did not maintain their rightful place 
of influence, or quite simply did not remain in their proper domain. In essence, 
they left heaven (cf. 1 En. 12:4). 
And they do it voluntarily. Again, this doesn’t have anything to do with a war in 
heaven. There is no such passage in the Old Testament. You go back to 
Genesis 6:1-4 and there’s no sense that they’re being kicked out of heaven “and 
now we’re going to go down to earth and have our way with human women.” 
That isn’t the sense that you get at all. They do what they do voluntarily. They 
choose to leave their own jobs, their own position of authority, their own proper 
place. They violate God’s sovereignty over them. 
Bauckham in is commentary concurs with that. He says: 
 
ἀρχήν here means a position of heavenly power or sphere of dominion, which 
the angels exercised over the world in the service of God (cf. Jub. 2:2; 5:6; 1 Enoch 
82:10–20; 1QM 10:12; 1QH 1:11; Justin, 2 Apol. 5.2). 
The angels exercise certain dominion over the world in the service of God and as 
cosmic powers. He’s relating this in part to some of the terminology that’s used in 
35:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
12 
the New Testament of angels as authorities and dominions and rulers of the 
power of the air, and you get some of these references that we’re familiar with. 
So angels have some kind of status, some kind of ruling authority, and these in 
Jude 6 just decide to leave it. They abandon it. They forsake it. They’re 
apostates. This is what apostates do. They leave something. They abandon it. 
And that’s what they do. 
2. The second line from Jude 8: they “left their proper dwelling.”  
Again, the Greek term here is oiketerion. This is right out of 1 Enoch and, again, 
most of your commentaries note this when dealing with the Greek text, but it 
actually is right out of 1 Enoch. So the idea of leaving (just hold that verb in your 
head–leaving) and leaving their proper dwelling… So specifically Bauckham 
writes this: 
 
[The Greek term] apolipontas to idion oikētērion “abandoned their proper home”: 
cf. 1 Enoch 12:4; 15:3: “you left…” 
Again, the angels left. That’s the same verb as apolipontas here. It’s ἀπελίπετε). 
But they leave their first estate. They leave something. They leave where they’re 
supposed to be in the high, holy, and eternal heaven. Then in 1 Enoch 15:7, the 
thing that they leave is called “their dwelling— the κατοίκησις . Again, it’s very 
similar to oiketerion. Again, they’re in the same family of words that mean 
“house” or “household dwelling” and that kind of thing. So it’s very evident that 
Jude is tracking with Enoch in Greek very closely. Bauckham says: 
 
The two participial phrases, in synonymous parallelism, stress the apostasy of the 
angels, which Jude intends to compare with that of the false teachers. The fact 
that sexual immorality was also involved in the angels’ sin will become apparent 
in v 7. 
(Again, Jude 7 which we’ve already noted.) 
3. Next, they rejected authority.  
They rejected the lordship over them, and the word here is kyriotes. It’s related to 
the word for Lord, kyrios. Gene Green in his commentary writes this. He says: 
 
 
The second accusation Jude levies against the heretics [MH: again, both the 
heretics, of course, by default by analogy against the angels that sinned, as well] is 
that… they revolt against lordship. Although kyriotēs may refer to angelic beings, 
as is the case in Col. 1:16 and Eph. 1:21 (cf. 2 En. 20.1; 1 En. 61.10; T. Sol. 8.6 [MS 
D]), here as in 2 Pet. 2:10 it denotes the ruling power of the Lord (κύριος, kyrios) 
himself… 
40:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
13 
So they reject Christ’s lordship—God’s lordship—itself when they’re doing this. 
So the angels that sinned… I mean, back in Genesis 6:1-4, it’s not just that 
they’re driven by irrational lust or something like this. I mean, that’s a big part of 
it, but they have to make a deliberate decision to be apostate and to forsake the 
authority that they did have and to leave the proper estate—the proper dwelling 
that God had assigned to them. They just chuck it all. To use the King James 
language, it’s a high-handed sin. It’s deliberate, it’s intentional, it’s purposeful, 
and it’s intentional apostacy. To make the point a little bit more, Green rabbit- 
trails a little bit on the word “reject.” He writes this. 
 
[Jude] picks up a verb (atheteō) found sixty times in the LXX, which, though it is 
used to translate seventeen different terms in the Hebrew Scriptures, most 
commonly stands for “bāgaḏ, ‘deceive, be unfaithful, betray,’ and pāšaʿ, ‘defect, 
revolt,’ with the result that in biblical usage this verb almost always means ‘be 
unfaithful,’ to revolt, or to betray, with the sense of ‘deceive’ or ‘scorn’ ” (TLNT 
1:40). Once again the question of authority is brought to the fore as Jude accuses 
these heretics not only of violating established norms but also of revolting against 
the authority of the Lord himself. As the archetypal examples of sin (vv. 5–7), they 
have broken faith. 
And those archetypal examples are the angels and Sodom and Gomorrah. I 
mean, they do what they do intentionally. It’s not an accident. So again, to use 
the King James language, it’s a high-handed sin. It’s very intentional and very 
deliberate.  
4. Further and lastly, the angels that sinned (by extension of the false teachers) 
are guilty of “blaspheming the glorious ones.”  
This has kind of an interesting twist to it. As Green points out in his commentary, 
identifying the glorious ones has been controversial among commentators. 
Commentators disagree as to who the glorious ones are. Some commentators 
opt for human dignitaries, which makes little sense if an analogy is being struck 
between human false teachers and angels that sinned. Again, if the analogy has 
angels in view, you would think that part of the analogy as well in verse 8 (the 
glorious ones), that those would be supernatural beings as well. And that’s where 
other commentators are—people like Bauckham, Neyrey, and JND Kelly, again, 
some of your major commentators on Jude. Herb Bateman is going to be the 
same way. I believe Herb takes the same position. But some of these major 
commentaries, they are going to see the “glorious ones” as supernatural beings; 
they’re angelic beings. And I’m with them certainly. I think that makes the most 
sense.  
Here’s a bit of a twist: Green makes the salient (and in my mind, decisive) 
observation when he writes this. He says: 
 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
14 
Jude’s idea is adopted by the book’s oldest interpreter, 2 Peter. In 2 Pet. 2:10–11, 
the “glories” are angelic beings.  
So again, if you’re looking at Jude and you’re wondering, “Who are the “glorious 
ones?” If you go over to 2 Peter 2:10-11, the “glorious ones,” the “glories,” are 
clearly angelic beings there in that passage. So, again, you should allow 
scripture to interpret scripture here. I think it’s also interesting… And this is 
another note that Green has, is that he discovers that in the Septuagint of 
Exodus 15:11... And this is a familiar passage again for those who have read 
Unseen Realm or have done anything with divine council stuff. Exodus 15:11. 
This is the verse: 
 
11 “Who is like you, O LORD, among the gods? 
     
It’s among the elim. It’s very clearly plural elim. 
 
11 “Who is like you, O LORD, among the gods? 
    Who is like you, majestic in holiness, 
    awesome in glorious deeds, doing wonders? 
Again, the elim there are the “glorious ones.” It translates plural elim—the gods—
as “glories” or the “glorious ones.” So if we take the plural elim there as a 
reference to the divine council (which you more or less have to), this amounts to 
an angelic transgression not only against the Most High, but also against the 
council itself— the heavenly host. And again, that’s where you get this idea of 
blaspheming the “glorious ones.” So these angels that sin way back in Genesis 
6:1-4 that are serving as these prototypical examples (prototypical archetypal 
analogy to the false teachers here), I mean they not only do what that do with 
boots on the ground, but they defect. They snub the authority of God himself and 
dismiss the rest of the loyal heavenly host of the council. They rebel against 
everybody. It’s an all-or-nothing proposition. They’re not maintaining relationships 
within the heavenly host here while they’re doing this. They rebel. They betray 
really the whole system, the whole Council—the Most High and his heavenly 
host. Green adds some other thoughts to this observation. He writes this. He 
says: 
 
The contrast that Jude sets up between the heretics’ behavior and that of Michael 
[MH: which is coming a bit later in Jude], who did not blaspheme the devil (vv. 9–
10), points in the direction of understanding these “glories” as supernatural 
beings. This interpretation also finds support, as Bauckham (1983: 57) notes, in 
the DSS, where angels are called “glories” [MH: they’re specifically called “the 
glorious ones”] (1QH 10.8; “and perhaps 11QpsZion [= 11Q5] 22.13”), 
45:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
15 
Again, I’m not going to read through all the Dead Sea Scroll nomenclature here, 
but there are Dead Sea Scrolls that call the angels “glories” or “glorious ones.” 
You get the same thing happening in 2 Enoch 22. It happened in the ascension 
of Isaiah 9:32. Green says: 
 
 
Jude’s nomenclature is understandable in light of the attribution of “glory” to 
angels… 
Just generally; in Revelation 18:1 you get this. You get glory language attached 
to angels. And in other Second Temple Jewish texts: the Testament of Levi and 
Philo, so on and so forth. 
 
…an idea “rooted in the OT, where the cherub is the bearer of the divine kābôd 
(Ezek. 9:3; 10:4, 18, 22; cf. also Sir. 49:8)” (J. Charles 1993: 102). 
I mean, you get this idea that within the heavenly throne room of God, within the 
heavenly council room of God, you have the occupants of the throne room there 
associated with the glory of the Lord. Well, of course it’s going to be a divine 
council context and the angels that sinned rebel against all of it. So it’s a very 
high-handed sin, very deliberate, very intentional. It’s not accidental. And it’s not 
that they were deceived or misled. They do it willingly. They are apostates. And 
this is what Jude wants people to see. He wants to use the example of the 
angels that sinned, as bad as that was, and use that as a foil for describing the 
false teachers.  
Now how this relates to false teachers is that their teaching is opposed to the 
body of truth; in other words, the faith once delivered to the holy ones, to the 
saints, to the Church back in Jude 3—that body of truth once handed down by 
God and to which the other members of the heavenly hosts were in agreement. 
This is essentially a snubbing of the will of God, the will of the Most High, and his 
council host, the rest of the supernatural family of God. It’s another way of 
describing just a whole wholesale complete defection. So the rest of Jude 6’s 
description, again, has secure roots in 1 Enoch’s content as well. I mean, it’s 
inescapable. What Jude is describing is the rebellion of Genesis 6:1-4. He’s 
using that as his example of a horrible defection of an archetypal sin. He begins 
his description of the false teachers there, and it’s an appropriate description 
because it’s intentional, it’s deliberate, and also because the sons of God, the 
Watchers (again, that’s Enoch’s term), were specifically guilty of teaching human 
beings false things, how to corrupt themselves.  
Now if you remember, either from Unseen Realm or maybe Reversing Hermon 
(another one of my books), this theme becomes very pronounced. Again, we 
can’t just rehearse all the Unseen Realm content here on a podcast episode, but 
I reference the work of Amar Annus, who was the one who goes back into the 
original Mesopotamian context for Genesis 6:1-4 in his article on The Origin of 
Watchers. And that is the explanation for why in Genesis 6 we go from verses 1-
50:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
16 
4 (which is the weird stuff—the sons of God, daughters of men, the Nephilim) to 
verse 5, that the entirety of humankind is wicked. How do you go from the angels 
that sinned, the sin of the sons of God… How do get from that to just a corporate 
human wickedness where every thought of the imagination of the heart was only 
evil continually? Well, you get that because in the original story behind the 
Genesis 6 episode, the original story of the Mesopotamian Apkallu, this is what 
they do. They transgress with human women and they teach humans more 
effectively how to destroy themselves. They teach them arts of warfare. They 
teach them astrology. They teach them idolatry. They teach them arts of 
seduction and immorality. All of these things specifically show up in the 
Mesopotamian material and in the book of Enoch and in other Dead Sea Scrolls 
that comment on this episode. 
So there’s a direct relationship between the sons of God choosing to leave 
heaven, to leave their task, their rule, to leave whatever their job was and 
whatever their station was, and come to earth. And it’s not just to create 
Nephilim, okay? The worse part of it is the way it corrupts humanity just generally 
and it turns the hearts of human beings against God and against God’s will, 
against God’s morality in all sorts of areas really in every way, every fundamental 
way. This is why Jude thinks it’s a good analogy to use the angels that sinned as 
an analogy to the false teachers. Because the angels that sinned taught false 
teaching. The story that Jude 6 is [audio breaks up]… Again, for further 
understanding there you’re going to have to go back and read Unseen Realm. 
It’s the only solution I have for you. This is why we write the books. Or you could 
go back and read Reversing Hermon as well. You would find it in there as well.  
But there’s an original Mesopotamian back story to all of this (to Genesis 6:1-4) 
that accounts for every point—the giants, the sexual element, the false teaching, 
everything. It accounts for every last piece of it that you get when you get into the 
Dead Sea Scrolls and the book of Enoch and all this stuff, because those 
sources remember the original context. Genesis 6:1-4 skips over it. It just 
assumes that the reader knows what is going on here. It assumes you know the 
back story, whereas, in the Dead Sea Scroll material that assumption is not 
made. And in Peter and Jude the assumption is not made either. Peter and Jude 
both have the angels that sinned kept in chains of gloomy darkness. That’s not in 
Genesis 6. You know where you find it? You find it not only in the book of Enoch 
and the Dead Sea Scrolls, you find it in the original Mesopotamian Apkallu story. 
The Mesopotamian Apkallu, which are the bad guys (the sons of God, the divine 
beings that mix themselves with human women in the story) are sent to the 
abyss. They are imprisoned in the abyss. Again, every element of what Jude and 
Peter and Enoch and the Dead Sea Scrolls and the Mesopotamian back story 
and Genesis 6:1-4… Every last element of all of it, you find in these sources. And 
Peter and Jude just assume that you have the back story. They assume their 
readers to be Jewish readers that have some acquaintance with Jewish material 
like the Dead Sea Scrolls or Enoch. They just assume that they know this. On 
our part, it’s harder because we have to recover this content. We have to recover 
55:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
17 
this knowledge by looking at all this other material, whereas Jude’s readers and 2 
Peter’s readers… This would’ve been intuitive because they know the stories 
really well. They know it well enough they can just pick out this or that Greek 
word and their readers just know what they’re tracking on.  
So again, Jude 6’s description has secure roots in Enoch’s content as well. This 
is the part where they’re kept in chains of gloomy darkness. Bauckham writes: 
 
The chains, to which Jude refers, are very prominent in the tradition of the fall of 
the Watchers (cf. 1 Enoch 13:1; 14:5; 54:3–5; 56:1–4; 88:1…  
And of course it’s also mentioned in the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Aramaic portions 
of Enoch. Again, the angels’ imprisonment is a very well-known feature that you 
don’t get from Genesis 6, but you get it from this other material. The fact that 
Peter and Jude are including this material in their own inspired writings (in what 
they’re writing in Jude 6 and what they’re writing in 2 Peter 2:4) tells you, again, 
that they assume their readers are familiar with this material and that it’s worth 
quoting. It has explanatory power. Otherwise, they wouldn’t include it, they 
wouldn’t dip into it. But they do, and they do it very explicitly. 
Now I want to add one more thought here from Bateman. Bateman writes: 
 
In Jude, however, angels are shackled in “eternal chains” (desmois aidiois). 
Whereas Jude’s version of the angelic rebels includes being bound in chains, no 
such punishment of the “sons of god” is mentioned in Gen 6.  
Which we just mentioned. You have to go back to the Mesopotamian material for 
that, which Bateman does not interact with, unfortunately. Bateman writes: 
 
Bauckham suggests this concept is “very prominent in the tradition of the fall of 
the Watchers.” 
Of course, it is. 
 
For instance, “And to Michael God said, ‘Make known to Semyaz and the others 
who are with him, who fornicated with the women, that they will die together 
with them in all their defilement… bind them for seventy generations underneath 
the rocks of the ground until the day of their judgment and of their 
consummation, until the eternal judgment is concluded’” (1 En. 10:12; cf. 4Q202 f 
1 iv, 5–10). 
Again, it’s very clearly in the Enochian material. Bateman asks: 
 
[W]here does the judgment occur? Although the confinement is “in darkness” … 
no such description occurs in Gen 6. Nevertheless, the concept is common in the 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
18 
Enoch tradition. For instance in 2 Enoch we read, “And those men picked me up 
and brought me up to the second heaven. And they showed me, and I saw a 
darkness greater than earthly darkness... Perhaps “in darkness” … refers to the 
ancient Greeks’ “underworld” (CEB) or “nether world” (RSV: “nether darkness”)… 
 
Closely related to the Greek concept of Hades is the idea of the underworld as an 
abyss. Enoch describes, “I then saw one… seizing that first star binding his hands 
and feet, and throwing him into an abyss—this abyss was narrow and deep, 
empty and dark” (1 En. 88:1; cf. 1 En. 54:3–5).  
So again, in the book of Enoch (we’re going to get this in Jude, too), the straying 
angels—the angels that sinned—are referred to as falling stars, wandering stars. 
And we’re actually going to get that later into the book of Jude. Jude is going to 
use that phrase, too. So it’s very clear that he is dipping into Enochian content 
here and he is, again, painting a whole portrait—a whole picture—of what he 
views as the villains par excellence, the angels that sinned. They were the ones 
that sort of started all this off, leaving their first estate, defecting, snubbing their 
nose at God, blaspheming the “glorious ones.” This is what they do—the angels 
that sinned initially way back in the Genesis account and, of course, the traditions 
that are associated with it—Mesopotamian, Enoch, and the Dead Sea Scrolls 
and so on and so forth in Genesis 6:5—the corruption of humankind on a total 
scale, totality scale. Jude thinks this is the best place to start to show how bad 
the false teachers really are and so this is where we wanted to focus today.  
Jude’s point of orientation, I think, is very clear. There is no mistaking what he is 
referencing in the Old Testament and in this wider ancient literature. And so the 
next time we are going to pick up with what he views as almost as bad or in the 
same line of badness: the Sodom and Gomorrah story. And that’s also going to 
involve angels in a different way. But we’ll get to that next time in the next 
episode when we hit Jude 7 and 8. 
TS:  Real quick, I just want to bring up, Mike, what frustrates me is some criticism 
of you is about how people think you have to read this extra literature, the 
Second Temple literature, in order to understand the Bible. And that frustrates 
me so much because you’re not saying you have to go read this to understand 
the Bible. It just helps put it into context what the people thought back then. 
MH:  Yeah. 
TS:  Why do people muddy it up? I mean, how hard is that to understand that 
reading extra sources helps inform you of the Bible? It doesn’t take away the 
divinity or anything else. 
MH:  Right. Why would you not want to read the Word of God in context? Do you 
want to read it out of context? It doesn’t make any sense. 
1:00:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 434: The Epistle of Jude, Part 3 
 
19 
TS:  Well, they just think it’s some kind of divine context. It’s a silo. There’s 
nothing extra that can come in or out. 
MH:  Right. And Jude… As we talked in the very first week, this is one of the 
reasons why some figures in the Early Church… People wondered about the 
canonical status of Jude because Jude blows that up and he goes right into the 
book of Enoch and he is going to quote 1 Enoch 1:9 intentionally. We’re not there 
yet. In verses 14 and 15, he quotes Enoch explicitly. But Jude not only quotes 
him, but he alludes to stuff in Enoch like we talked about today all over the place. 
So the scripture doesn’t operate in a vacuum or a silo. It has a context. And the 
men that God chose to write it (in this case, Jude), felt very free to loop this 
material in for greater understanding just to give it some context. And that’s all 
we’re trying to do. 
TS:  Alright, Mike. Well, don’t forget you can go visit our sponsor at 
Logos.com/nakedbible. Go help support our show at Logos. We would 
appreciate it. We look forward to the next installment of Jude. And with that, I 
want to thank everybody for listening to the Naked Bible Podcast! God bless. 
 

---PAGE---
