Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 438: The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
 
1 
Naked Bible Podcast Transcript 
Episode 438 
The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
August 14, 2022 
 
Teacher: Dr. Michael S. Heiser (MH) 
Host: Trey Stricklin (TS) 
 
Episode Summary 
 
In Jude 14-16, the author continues the theme of the judgment of his opponents, 
the false teachers. In this instance, Jude cites the book of Enoch (1 Enoch 1:9) 
specifically to make his case. In this episode, we discuss the implications of 
Jude’s citation of 1 Enoch and the Old Testament sources from which the verse 
in 1 Enoch derive. 
 
 
Transcript 
 
TS:  Welcome to the Naked Bible Podcast, Episode 438:  The Epistle of Jude 
Part 7. I’m the layman, Trey Stricklin, and he’s the scholar, Dr. Michael Heiser. 
Hey, Mike, how are you doing? 
 
MH:  Oh, not too bad, not too bad. Heading into some new treatment. 
 
TS:  Radiation? 
 
MH:  Yeah. We’ll see how that goes. It’s all designed to get me to surgery. So 
hopefully after a few weeks of that, that’s what it will accomplish. 
 
TS:  Okay, well, we’ll include that in our prayers for sure. Well, Mike, we’re 
getting close here to the end of Jude and as we do with all our book studies, 
we’re going to ask for questions (if anybody has any) and we’ll do a specific Q&A 
about the book of Jude. So please send me your questions at 
treystricklin@gmail.com. We’re probably going to shoot for it in two or three 
weeks. So if you can, send me your questions as soon as you have them and 
that would be good. Alright, Mike, well I’m ready if you are. 
 
MH:  Sounds like a plan, yeah. 
 
TS:  Yeah, sounds like a plan. I’m ready if you’re ready. 
 
MH:  Yeah, yeah, let’s jump in here to part 7. So today we’re going to cover Jude 
14-16 and I’m just going to read that from the ESV and then we’ll just jump into a 
few things here. 
5:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 438: The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
 
2 
14 It was also about these [MH: the false teachers] that Enoch, the seventh from 
Adam, prophesied, saying, “Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his 
holy ones, 15 to execute judgment on all and to convict all the ungodly of all 
their deeds of ungodliness that they have committed in such an ungodly way, 
and of all the harsh things that ungodly sinners have spoken against 
him.” 16 These are grumblers, malcontents, following their own sinful 
desires; they are loud-mouthed boasters, showing favoritism to gain 
advantage. 
 
So Jude, no surprise, is still after the false teachers. That’s basically what the 
whole book is about, and at this time he is going to loop Enoch in. Now up until 
this point we’ve had Jude illustrate or analogize the false teachers to a number of 
things in the Old Testament known for their villainy: the Genesis 6 incident with 
the angels that sinned, we’ve had Cain, we’ve had Korah, we’ve had Balaam… 
Again, a whole series of Old Testament… I want to say “bad guys,” but just really 
unfavorable things that happened in the Old Testament that were judged by God 
harshly, and that is his point. Again, that is why he is using these analogies. 
Sodom and Gomorrah was the other one I left off that list.  
 
Again, this is the point: Jude is saying the false teachers that he is writing against 
(that apparently there has been some struggle with) are like these, and then he 
will point to these Old Testament examples in terms of not only their wickedness, 
but more often than not the way they were judged. And there is no exception 
here, except this time it is going to be a little bit different.  
 
Look at that first line in Jude 14: 
 
14 It was also about these that Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied, 
 
And then there’s a quotation. Well, if you go back and look at the Old Testament, 
there is no such quotation from Enoch because that’s not what Jude is citing. He 
is citing the book of Enoch here in verse 14—in Jude 14. So we’ll get into that in 
a moment. But Enoch, of course, was considered a prophet. A prophet is just 
simply someone who speaks for God. And so the Biblical Enoch had this 
reputation because he was specially favored by God even though he doesn’t do 
any prophesying in the Old Testament. I mean, he’s only in the Old Testament in 
Genesis 5:18, 5:21-24. This is not the Enoch of Genesis 4. This is the Enoch of 
Genesis 5, the one who was taken that never died—he was “translated.” I think 
how the King James renders it is “transported again to the heavenly realms,” so 
on and so forth, but there’s no recorded death. He is just taken to heaven. He is 
a righteous man, and because of that he gets this reputation as being somebody 
special in the Old Testament. He is the seventh from Adam that follows the 
genealogy of Genesis 5:1-24.  And that same order is sort of spelled out where 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 438: The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
 
3 
Enoch is the seventh from Adam (you can find that in 1 Enoch 37:1 or 1 
Chronicles 1:1-3 or also in Luke 3:37-38). So he is the seventh from Adam. That 
phrase though (the seventh from Adam) comes from the book of Enoch itself. It 
uses it in chapter 60:8, chapter 93:3. Jubilees 7:39 refers to Enoch as the 
seventh in his generation. So this designation, as far as the wording goes, also 
comes from the book of Enoch, but that isn’t the quotation part. The quotation 
part is the Lord coming with ten thousands of holy ones, so on and so forth. And 
again, we’ll get there in a second. 
 
Green in his Jude commentary writes this about the seventh position because, 
again, that is sort of a biblical number and it has some special meaning. He 
writes: 
 
The “seventh” position held particular significance for the Semitic mind (God 
rested on the seventh day—Gen. 2:2–3; the ark came to rest in the seventh 
month—Gen. 8:4; the Israelites ate unleavened bread seven days—Exod. 12:15–
16; there was of course rest every seventh day—Exod. 20:10–11; [there was a] 
seventh generation [that was talked about in Second Temple Judaism, specifically 
the]—Apoc. Ab. 32.1 and Let. Jer. 3 [that had special significance in Judaism], the 
fever left at the seventh hour—John 4:52; the seventh seal—Rev. 8:1; the seventh 
angel—Rev. 10:7) [MH: things are in 7s is the point]. Sometimes genealogies were 
even restructured to highlight the importance of a prominent person [MH: so that 
would be number 7] (see Sasson 1978 and his article in IDBSup 355). Identifying 
Enoch in this manner highlights the significance of the following words: no less 
than the seventh from Adam spoke against these heretics. 
 
That is the end of Green’s quote and that’s what he wants to get to. The fact that 
Enoch was the seventh from Adam is a position held in special regard. And so 
even this one—"even the seventh from Adam”—would have had something 
negative to say about the false teachers. So this is the mood that the wording 
seeks to conjure up. Then Jude proceeds to cite the book of Enoch. And this is 
the famous (or infamous) place where he does that. He cites 1 Enoch 1:9 directly 
here and he cites basically the entire verse in Greek (the Greek Enoch—Greek 
version of 1 Enoch). So I’m going to read 1 Enoch 1:9 in its own context. This 
comes from Charlesworth’s Old Testament Pseudepigraphal Volume. So this is 
basically how the book of Enoch opens. I’m going to start in verse 3: 
 
3 And I took up with a parable (saying), “The God of the universe, the Holy Great 
One, will come forth from his dwelling. 4 And from there he will march upon 
Mount Sinai and appear in his camp emerging from heaven with a mighty 
power.5  And everyone shall be afraid, and Watchers shall quiver. And great fear 
and trembling shall seize them unto the ends of the earth. 6 Mountains and high 
places will fall down and be frightened. And high hills shall be made low; and they 
shall melt like a honeycomb before the flame. 7 And earth shall be rent asunder; 
10:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 438: The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
 
4 
and all that is upon the earth shall perish. And there shall be a judgment upon all, 
(including) the righteous. 8 And to all the righteous he will grant peace. He will 
preserve the elect, and kindness shall be upon them. They shall all belong to God 
and they shall prosper and be blessed; and the light of God shall shine unto them. 
9 Behold, he will arrive with ten million of the holy ones in order to execute 
judgment upon all. He will destroy the wicked ones and censure all flesh on 
account of everything that they have done, that which the sinners and the wicked 
ones committed against him.” 
 
So this is an apocalyptic vision. 1 Enoch is an apocalyptic book. It’s kind of like 
the book of Revelation, which we mentioned before. But of course, in Enoch’s 
case, Enoch is interpreting and affirming the apocalyptic vision of the Old 
Testament prophets just like John did in the book of Revelation. And we spent a 
whole lot of time going through the book of Revelation and how it references the 
Old Testament. Enoch does more of the same, talking about the end of the world 
as we know it. He is interpreting and affirming the apocalyptic vision of the Old 
Testament prophets. There is nothing in what I read there that you wouldn’t also 
find in the Old Testament. And so we have in verse 14: 
 
14 It was also about these that Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied, 
saying, “Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his holy ones, 15 to 
execute judgment on all and to convict all the ungodly of all their deeds of 
ungodliness that they have committed in such an ungodly way, and of all the 
harsh things that ungodly sinners have spoken against him.” 
 
This is a vision of judgment. Scholars have drawn attention to the way Jude cites 
1 Enoch here. Those of you who are into the book of Enoch, you probably have 
heard of this before, but scholars have been taken by the fact that Jude uses 
formulaic language in this passage that is found in other New Testament books 
for the way Old Testament prophets get cited. In other words, Jude cites Enoch 
like other New Testament writers would cite scripture. In this case, we have the 
word “prophesied” in the declaration that someone prophesied. So verse 14 was 
also about “these that Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied, saying…” and 
then here comes the quote. That’s typical language elsewhere in the New 
Testament for quoting parts of the Old Testament. In Matthew 11:13… Let’s just 
look up a few here. Matthew 11:13 says this: 
 
 
13 For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John,  
 
Again, so there’s this word of prophecy. Let’s look at another one here. Matthew 
15:7: 
 
 
7 You hypocrites! Well did Isaiah prophesy of you, when he said: 
15:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 438: The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
 
5 
 
And then here comes the quote. We’ll do one more here. Let’s see, Mark 7:6: 
 
6 And he said to them, “Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites, as it is 
written, 
 
So a little bit different there, but “Well did Isaiah prophesy,” and then here comes 
the quote: 
 
“‘This people honors me with their lips, 
    but their heart is far from me; 
7 in vain do they worship me, 
    teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.’ 
 
So it’s a way of setting up a quotation, and scholars have noticed that what Jude 
does here with 1 Enoch sounds a lot like what other new Testament writers do 
for parts of the Old Testament. And so this has raised the question of Enoch’s 
status. Was he not considered sort of on equal footing with some of this other 
material from the Old Testament? Green has some thoughts to interject there 
that I want to read to you as well. He writes here about the work of J. Charles in 
1991. So it’s not the R.H. Charles that’s known for his Enoch studies. It’s a 
different scholar. Green writes: 
 
J. Charles (1991a: 144) attempts to show that “prophesied” here may mean 
something more general than classifying 1 Enoch as a prophetic book: “And if, by 
way of illustration, a Cretan is to the apostle Paul a ‘prophet’ (Titus 1:12), then 
[MH: so the reasoning goes] Enoch, in Jude 14, can ‘prophesy.’ ” However, in 
Titus 1:12 Paul calls Epimenides “their very own prophet.” Jude, on the other 
hand, says “Enoch … prophesied” and places this “text” together with other 
authoritative “texts” (vv. 5–7, 9, 11, 17–18)… 
 
Let me just stop there. In other words, the argument goes that Jude is including 1 
Enoch in and along with these other Old Testament examples to portray the false 
teachers very negatively. And so some have thought that this indicates that 1 
Enoch should be considered at the level of these other Old Testament books and 
it should be considered canonical. And Green in his commentary doesn’t think it 
is canonical, but he does think that Enoch was specially revered by Jude and 
specially respected. So this is going to be his explanation of why it gets quoted 
the way it does. It just had a higher status than other books. [Audio breaks up], 
but that doesn’t mean canonical. That’s his argument. So he writes here: 
 
There is no indication here that he simply quotes 1 Enoch because his opponents 
considered it to be authoritative (contra J. Charles 1991a: 144; Moo 1996: 273). 
Jude rather identifies the source of the prophecy as Enoch, underscores the 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 438: The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
 
6 
significance of that personage (“seventh from Adam,” see below), and claims that 
what was predicted is now fulfilled in the heretics (τούτοις, toutois, about these). 
Nothing in his language or in the context of the book suggests that he viewed this 
“text” as anything other than authoritative. 
 
That’s the end of Green’s quote. So Green is saying that he believes that Jude 
cited Enoch as an authority here (as an authoritative text) for what was 
happening, looping the false teachers into this just like the other stuff in the Old 
Testament. And in this case, Enoch had prophesied about it being the seventh 
from Adam, that this was all part and parcel of the end of the world, the 
apocalypse, the day of the Lord, so on and so forth. And that’s a familiar New 
Testament theme as well. False teaching is going to increase the further down 
the prophetic road you go. Now I think this is an honest assessment by Green, 
but I don’t find it persuasive, as far as I’m not convinced that Jude saw the book 
of Enoch with the same status as other Old Testament books. There is more than 
one reason why you would cite something, for instance. But let me just go 
through a few reasons why I don’t find this particular argument that persuasive, 
even though I think it’s an honest argument. 
 
Other Second Temple Jews cited Enoch with authority. They did the same thing, 
but they also cited in the same way with formulaic language other books that no 
Jew considered canonical except for the Qumran sect. And I’m thinking here of 
the people at Qumran. They cite the Temple Scroll, which is something they 
produced as though it was scripture. So the fact that it gets cited with authority 
doesn’t mean that the believing community as a whole would have accepted the 
work as canonical. And they didn’t. There’s no evidence that any Jewish group 
outside those that lived at Qumran thought that Enoch was canonical. There is 
no evidence for that at all.  
 
Secondly Enoch failed a major test of canonicity within the mainstream Jewish 
community. It was not witnessed in Hebrew, and this is a major canonical test. In 
the Jewish community, Hebrew was not just the language of literacy, but the 
language of the scriptures, and this is how they determined their canon. The 
material had to be written in Hebrew. That was sort of like a first-level test, and 
there is no evidence, archeologically speaking, that Enoch ever existed in 
Hebrew. The farthest back you can go is the Qumran material, and they had 
preserved the book in Aramaic because there were a few scraps of Aramaic 
Enoch there among the Dead Sea Scrolls. But that’s not Hebrew and so it sort of 
fails that major test. 
 
Third, the Old Testament at times quotes books and the point isn’t their authority. 
In other words, the Old Testament might use formulaic language or it might quote 
something and it may depend on just sort of the convenience of the author. The 
author might have some other reason why he is citing a text. Enoch was an Old 
Testament prophetic figure. So was the point of Jude citing Enoch here in this 
20:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 438: The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
 
7 
passage to affirm what is written in Old Testament narrative or to give the book of 
Enoch authority? I think it's to affirm what’s written in Old Testament narrative. In 
1 Enoch 1:9, Enoch conveniently combines several apocalyptic ideas from the 
Old Testament that otherwise Jude would’ve had to cite three or four different 
passages to make his point. But 1 Enoch 1:9 actually combines several Old 
Testament texts, specifically Jeremiah 25:30-31, Isaiah 66:15-16, and Zechariah 
14:5. So it could be that Jude just found 1 Enoch 1:9 convenient because it 
combines all these thoughts into one text and therefore, he cited it. So rather 
than quoting all three, Jude quotes the verse in 1 Enoch that combines them and 
he uses the prophetic language not as a commentary on the book (not to 
endorse 1 Enoch as specially canonical here), but more or less as a commentary 
on the person—Enoch himself, who was revered and considered a prophet by 
the believing community. In other words, he endorses the man, not the book, and 
he endorses, again, the content, which happens to be three separate passages 
from the Old Testament that get combined in 1 Enoch 1:9. So I think that is really 
what is going on here. 
 
Lastly, of course, Enoch failed the historical test. No Jewish community except 
the one at Qumran thought it was sacred and canonical, and very, very few 
Christians did. There were a couple, of course. We’ve gone through this material 
before so I don’t want to belabor it here, but there were a couple of important 
figures in the history of the early church (Tertullian and Irenaeus, people like that) 
that considered 1 Enoch to be right up there with the rest of scripture to consider 
it canonical, but they wound up losing that argument because the witness of the 
church and mass went in a different direction. So I’m trying to remember which 
one it was, but I think it was Tertullian that said toward the end of his life that he 
was content believing that the Holy Spirit had moved within the bulk of the 
believing church and that the book should not be considered canonical. So he 
gave it up. He gave up the argument because of the witness of the believing 
community. He just assumed that the Holy Spirit would direct the community and 
make the right decision, and he was content with that, even when it went against 
an idea that he liked. So again, there is very little specific testimony that would 
support the idea of Enoch being canonical, even though it was considered to 
carry authority. And, again, my judgment here is that it carries authority and it’s 
convenient for citation because it combines these ideas from three passages in 
the Old Testament and that’s why Jude quotes it, not because he believes it’s 
scripture, but because, “Why would I quote from all three of these other 
passages when I can get them all bound together in one text of Enoch which you 
all know? You all know what this book is.” The book was revered. The book was 
held in high regard so why not? Why not do it? Again, I think it’s as simple as 
that. 
 
A few other comments here before we wrap up. Verse 14: 
 
“Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his holy ones, 
25:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 438: The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
 
8 
 
Elsewhere in the New Testament, you get the same picture. Elsewhere in the 
New Testament an angelic host will accompany Christ upon his return. We see 
that in Matthew 13:41, Matthew 25:31, Mark 8:38, 1 Thessalonians 3:13, among 
other verses. There are passages like this one that use the language of “myriads 
upon myriads,” “thousands upon thousands.” Some English translations will 
translate that into an extraordinary large number like millions. The language is 
actually ambiguous. Some scholars define “myriad” (again the Greek word used 
here) as a group of ten thousand. If you use BDAG (which is the standard Greek 
Lexicon), you’ll find a few references. There are a few specific examples where 
the word here in question refers to a unit of ten thousand. But other scholars 
argue that it’s a much larger number without any precise definition of quantity. 
And BDAG has examples of that as well ,where it is just something that is far 
more than ten thousand. So the honest answer is we don’t really know, and ESV 
chooses “ten thousands of his holy ones”—ten thousands plural (not just ten 
thousand, but ten thousands plural) to try to kind of combine those two things 
that BDAG will bear witness to. Some texts say it’s ten thousand; others say it’s a 
much larger number. So ESV just pluralizes “ten thousands of his holy ones” and 
handles it that way.  
 
The term is used elsewhere to describe the angelic hosts in several biblical and 
Second Temple texts. Daniel 7:10 is probably the one that comes to everybody’s 
mind, where there were myriads upon myriads of heavenly hosts that are 
witnessing the divine council meeting. Hebrews 12:22—the enumerable 
celebration of angels… We get that language that we see here in Jude. 
Revelation 5:11… You get it in 1 Enoch as well—1 Enoch 14:22 and 1 Enoch 
40:1. It is a familiar image from both Old Testament, New Testament, and 
Second Temple literature, but we’re not quite sure exactly how many or what the 
count would be.  
 
In verse 15, one comment on this phrasing: 
 
15 to execute judgment on all and to convict all the ungodly of all their deeds of 
ungodliness… 
 
Green says: 
 
“Execute judgment” is an expression commonly employed in the Septuagint (Gen. 
18:19, 25; Deut. 10:18; 33:21; Isa. 5:7; 56:1; Jer. 7:5; 1 Macc. 6:22; Sir. 35:18).  
 
This is language found directly in the Septuagint specifically for divine judgment. 
Green continues. He says: 
 
This divine action (Heb. 12:23; James 4:12) is affected through the Lord Jesus 
Christ (Acts 10:42; Acts17:31, Rom. 2:16) who comes to judge (2 Tim. 4:1; 1 Pet. 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 438: The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
 
9 
4:5; Rev. 6:10). [30:00] The Lord will also “convict” (ἐλέγξαι, elenxai), a term that 
in other contexts means “to show someone his sin and to summon him to 
repentance” (F. Büchsel, TDNT 2:474; see Matt. 18:15; Eph. 5:11; 1 Tim. 5:20; 2 
Tim. 4:2; Titus 1:9, 13; 2:15). 
 
So  what he’s getting at here is this is also self-formulaic language coming right 
out of the Septuagint for the Messiah basically to render judgment. Green writes: 
 
In judicial contexts “this rebuke condemns; it is no longer educative” [MH: like 
informing them that they’re in trouble; it’s a rendered judgment]. In the judgment 
the true character of the heretics will be brought to light (MM 202; John 3:20; 
16:8). Jude appears to hold no hope of any redemption for the heretics. In Christ’s 
coming, they will be judged and condemned. 
 
Again, it’s the language of Messianic expectation and the language of secure 
judgment in the Septuagint and in Second Temple texts. So Green’s argument is 
this is why Jude is using it—to sort of demonstrate the certainty of what’s going 
to happen to the false teachers. 
 
A couple more items. In verse 16, ESV has one Greek term translated 
“grumblers.” The term that is used here is not really whining under hardship. 
That’s not really what it means, but in the Old Testament in the Septuagint, the 
motif of grumping really refers to a disgruntled criticizer. So Jude likely has in 
mind more negative examples from Israel’s history, again, comparing the false 
teachers to disgruntled critics. And there are a number of examples of this in the 
Old Testament. The people grumbled against Moses (Exodus 15:24, Numbers 
14:36, Numbers 17:5.) They also grumbled against Moses and Aaron (Exodus 
16:2, Numbers 14:2, Numbers 16:41). They also grumbled (again, same similar 
language there) against God. God was the one who appointed Moses and Aaron. 
So they grumble against God who appointed those leaders (Exodus 16:7-9, 
Exodus 16:12, Numbers 14:27-29). So even with the use of this term “grumbling,” 
Jude is getting at these negative examples in the Old Testament of these 
disgruntled critics and saying this is what the false teachers are. They actually 
lack real authority and they want to sort of foist themselves in the position of 
authority by virtue of what they [audio breaks up]… They show favoritism to win 
favor here in verse 16. This is a Greek idiom—“showing favoritism” ESV has. 
Literally in the Greek, it is “to marvel at the face” or “to marvel at” or “to look at 
the face.” And it refers to disingenuous favoritism or praise of someone. The 
more familiar “lift up the face” is a positive gesture of praise or approval, 
something like that, but this wording here sort of plays off that using a different 
Greek verb—“to marvel at” and then “the face,” just to get at the fact that this 
would be sort of lifting up someone’s face in a disingenuous way. You’re just 
deliberately flattering them to get them on your side, to win favor from them. 
Green writes: 
 
30:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 438: The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
 
10 
The expression … is quite common in the LXX, meaning either to rightly favor 
someone (Gen. 19:21; Deut. 28:50; 2 Kings 5:1; Job 22:8; Isa. 9:15 [9:14 LXX]) or, 
more commonly, to show undue partiality, of the kind that may pervert justice 
(Lev. 19:15; Deut. 10:17; 2 Chron. 19:7; Prov. 18:5; Job 13:10; 34:19; Ps. Sol. 
2:18). 
 
So in certain contexts then, as here in Jude, the meaning of the phrase appears 
to be “to flatter” or to get something. So this is how Jude portrays the false 
teachers. They are disgruntled critics. They grumble. Again, they’re disgruntled 
critics just like the negative examples from the Old Testament that Jude has 
essentially peppered his audience with in these episodes in the Old Testament. 
And they’re only saying what they’re saying to you to flatter you—just to get your 
approval. As we talked about last week, you go back into the letter of Jude here 
and you really look at the fact that they are nothing. They offer nothing. So prior 
to verse 14 he calls them in verse 12: 
 
12 … shepherds feeding themselves; waterless clouds, swept along by winds; 
fruitless trees in late autumn, twice dead, uprooted; 13 wild waves of the sea, 
casting up the foam of their own shame; wandering stars… 
 
Again, which was a direct reference back to the Watchers. In verse 14: 
 
14 It was also about these that Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied, 
saying, “Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his holy ones, 15 to 
execute judgment on all… 
 
So this is their destiny. Don’t listen to them. They’re just grumblers, malcontents, 
following their own sinful desires. They’re going to get what they want. They’re 
going to manipulate you. They’re going to show favoritism to you to gain 
advantage over you. Don’t follow them. Again, their judgment is secure. And in 
this case, again, quoting Enoch with authority who is referencing the Old 
Testament in three passages about their destiny (what’s going to happen in the 
day of the Lord). On the day of the Lord, all of this is going to catch up to them. 
And so you want to be on the right side of that, not on the side that God is going 
to judge. And that’s basically his point in what he is doing here in this quotation 
from 1 Enoch 1:9. 
 
So that’s it for this time. For next time, we are going to finish up the book of Jude. 
We’re going to go through the rest of the verses, verses 17-25. There’s one real 
specific thing that I think it is important to catch in those verses and we’ll take a 
look at some other things in this last section of the letter, but the next time we’ll 
wrap up and finish up with Jude. 
 
35:00 

---PAGE---
Naked Bible Podcast                                                                              
 Episode 438: The Epistle of Jude, Part 7 
 
11 
TS:  Alright, Mike. That sounds good. Don’t forget to send me your questions 
about Jude at treystricklin@gmail.com so we can have a specific Q&A over the 
book of Jude. And also remember, please go visit logos.com/nakedbible if you 
have not done so. We would appreciate it and looking forward to wrapping up 
Jude next week, Mike. And with that, I want to thank everybody for listening to 
the Naked Bible Podcast! God Bless. 
 

---PAGE---
