Deuteronomy 32:8 and the Sons of God 
 
By Michael S. Heiser 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
Moses' farewell song in Deuteronomy 32:1-43 is one of the more intriguing 
portions of Deuteronomy, and has received a good deal of attention among scholars, 
primarily for its poetic features, archaic orthography and morphology, and text-critical 
problems.1  Among the textual variants present in the Song of Moses, one in Deut. 32:8 
stands out as particularly fascinating.  The verse is rendered as follows in the NASB:   
 
“When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance, when He 
separated the sons of man, He set the boundaries of the peoples 
according to the number of the sons of Israel.”  
 
 
Controversy over the text of this verse concerns the last phrase, “according to the 
number of the sons of Israel,” which reflects the reading of the Masoretic Text of the 
Hebrew Bible (hereafter, MT), l)r#oy ynb.  The MT reading is also reflected in several 
later revisions of the Septuagint (hereafter, LXX):  a manuscript of Aquila (Codex X), 
Symmachus (also Codex X), and Theodotion.2  Most witnesses to the LXX in verse 8, 
however, read a1ggelw=n qeou= , which is interpretive.3  Several also read ui9w=n qeou= .4   
Both of these Greek renderings presuppose a Hebrew text of either  Myhl) ynb or 
                                                 
1 For an up-to-date overview of the scholarship on the Song of Moses, see Paul Sanders’s thorough 
treatment of Deuteronomy 32, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32  (Leiden:  E.J. Brill, 1996).  See also F. 
M. Cross and D. N. Freedman, Studies in Ancient Yahwistic Poetry, Biblical Resources Series (Grand 
Rapids:  William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1997); W. F. Albright, “Some Remarks on the Song 
of Moses in Deuteronomy XXXII,” Vetus Testamentum 9 (1959):  339–46; and D. A. Robertson, 
Linguistic Evidence in Dating Early Hebrew Poetry, Society of Biblical Literature:  Dissertation Series 3 
(Missoula, Montana:  Scholars Press, 1972). 
2 Fridericus Field, ed., Origenis Hexaplorum, Tomus I :  Prolegomena, Genesis-Esther  (Hildesheim:  
Georg Olms Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1964), 320, footnote 12. 
3 This is the predominant reading in the LXX tradition and is nearly unanimous.  See John William 
Wevers, ed., Septuaginta:  Vetus Testamentum Graecum, Auctoritate Academiae Scientiarum Gottingensis 
Editum, vol. III,2:  Deuteronomium  (Go.-ttingen:  Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1977), 347 (hereafter, 
Go.-ttingen LXX); idem, Notes on the Greek Text of Deuteronomy,  Society of Biblical Literature (Atlanta:  
Scholars Press, 1995, 513).  Wevers refers to this majority reading as "clearly a later attempt to avoid any 
notion of lesser deities in favor of God's messengers" (Notes on the Greek Text of Deuteronomy, 513). 
4 Septuaginta, 347 (hence the Go.-ttingen LXX has adopted this reading as the best, dispute fewer 
attestations).  

---PAGE---
2 
Myl) ynb.  These Hebrew phrases underlying a1ggelw=n qeou= and ui9w=n qeou= are 
attested in two manuscripts from Qumran,5 and by one (conflated) manuscript of Aquila.6   
 
The debate over which text is to be preferred is more than a fraternal spat among 
textual critics.  The notion that the nations of the world were geographically partitioned 
and owe their  terrestrial identity to the sovereign God takes the reader back to the Table 
of Nations in Genesis 10-11, and two details there regarding God's apportionment  of the 
earth that are important for the context of the textual debate in Deuteronomy 32:8.  First, 
the Table of Nations catalogs seventy nations, but Israel is not included in the inventory.7  
Second, the use of the same Hebrew root (drp) in both passages to describe the 
"separation" of humankind and the nations substantiates the long-recognized observation 
of scholars that Genesis 10-11 are the backdrop to the statement in Deut. 32:8.8   Israel 
alone is Yahweh’s portion and so is not numbered among the seventy other nations.  The 
referent of the number seventy, the "sons of Israel" (in MT), initially seemed 
understandable enough, for both Gen 46:27 and Exo. 1:5  state that  70 members of 
Jacob's family went down to Egypt in the days of Joseph.9  Little thought was given, 
however, to the logic of the correlation:  How is it that the number of the pagan nations 
was determined in relation to an entity (Israel) or individuals (Jacob and his household) 
that did not yet exist?  Even if one contends that the correlation was in the mind of God 
                                                 
5 l) ynb is not an option for what was behind the LXX reading, as the Qumran support for Hebrew text 
underlying the unrevised LXX demonstrates.  First, 4QDtq has spaces for additional letters following the 
l of  its  [    ]l) ynb.  4QDtj clearly reads Myhwl) ynb (Sanders, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 
156).  See also Emanuel Tov, Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible  (Minneapolis:  Fortress Press, 1992), 
269. 
6 Go.-ttingen  LXX,  347; Origenis Hexaplorum, Tomus I :  Prolegomena, Genesis-Esther ,  320.  The 
manuscript of Aquila is Codex 85. 
7 As one scholar notes, "On investigation the reader is struck by a deliberate pattern in the selection of 
names for the Table. For example, of the sons of Japheth, who number seven, two are selected for further 
listing. From those two sons come seven grandsons, completing a selective list of fourteen names under 
Japheth. With Ham’s thirty descendants and Shem’s twenty-six, the grand total is seventy" (Allen P. Ross, 
"Studies in the Book of Genesis - Part 2:  The Table of Nations in Genesis 10 - its Structure," BibSac vol 
137: 548 (Oct-Dec 1980):  342).  As Ross notes in a footnote, some scholars arrive at the number of 71 for 
the names, depending on how the counting is done.  This author would agree with Ross and Cassuto, 
whom he quotes, that the accurate number is seventy (cf. Umberto Cassuto, A Commentary on the Book of 
Genesis:  From Noah to Abraham,  (Jerusalem:  Magnes Press, 1964), 177–180. 
8Cassuto, A Commentary on the Book of Genesis:  From Noah to Abraham, 174–78; Albright, "Song of 
Moses," 343–44.  Specifically, a Niphal form of drp is used in Gen. 10:5 (wdrpn) and the Hiphil occurs 
in Deut. 32:8 (wdyrphb). 
9There is a textual debate on this passage in Exodus as well.  Although space prohibits a thorough 
treatment of these texts, they do provide an example, in conjunction with Deut. 32:8, of what is truly the 
primary guiding principle in textual criticism:  the reading that best explains the rise of the others is most 
likely original.  Put another way, which reading has the strongest explanatory power?  In the case of Gen. 
46:27 and Exo. 1:5, LXX and Qumran disagree with MT together when they read that 75 people went to 
Egypt with Jacob.  MT's 70 is most likely original here, because the number 75 is quite demonstrably a 
later "correction" of MT, since it incorporates five additional descendants from Ephraim and Manasseh.  
This example from 46:27 and Exo. 1:5 features the same textual alignment as with Deut. 32:8 (LXX and 
Qumran agree together against  MT), but here MT is to be preferred.  The point is that one cannot be 
biased in favor of either MT or LXX, but that the reading that best explains the rise of the others is the 
preferred reading, regardless of the text-type. 

---PAGE---
3 
prior to Israel's existence and only recorded much later, what possible point would there 
be behind connecting the pagan Gentile nations numerically with the children of 
promise?  On the other hand, what could possibly be meant by the textual option that 
created a correspondence between the number of the nations in Genesis 10-11 and 
heavenly beings?    
 
Literary and conceptual parallels discovered in the literature of Ugarit, however, 
have provided a more coherent explanation for the number 70 in Deuteronomy 32:8 - and 
have furnished powerful ammunition to textual scholars who argued against the "sons of 
Israel" reading in MT.  Ugaritic mythology plainly states that the head of its pantheon, El 
(who, like the God of the Bible, is also referred to as El Elyon, the "Most High") fathered 
70 sons,10 thereby setting the number of the "sons of El" (Ugaritic, bn  )il ).  An 
unmistakable linguistic parallel with the Hebrew text underlying the LXX reading was 
thus discovered, one which prompted many scholars to accept the LXX reading on 
logical and philological grounds:  God (El Elyon in Deut. 32:8) divided the earth 
according to the number of heavenly beings who already existed from the time of 
creation.11  The coherence of this explanation notwithstanding, some commentators resist 
the LXX reading, at least in part because they fear that an acceptance of the  
Myhl) /Myl) ynb (bny  )lym  /  )lhym ) readings (both of which may be translated 
“sons of gods”) somehow requires assent to the notion that Yahweh is the author of 
polytheism.  This apprehension thus prompts text-critical defenses of MT in 
Deuteronomy 32:8, such as that of David L. Stevens.12   
 
This author contends that the choice of MT in Deuteronomy 32:8 is based on a 
misunderstanding of both the textual history of the Hebrew Bible and text-critical 
methodology, prejudiced evaluation of non-MT texts, and an unfounded concern that 
departure from the MT reading results in “Israelite polytheism.” The primary goal of the 
present article is to show that understanding "sons of God" as the correct reading in 
Deuteronomy 32:8 in no way requires one to view Israelite religion as polytheistic.  
Toward that end, some selected comments on the text-critical issues are necessary.    
 
TEXTUAL CRITICISM AND THE "SONS OF GOD" IN DEUTERONOMY 32:8 
 
A Word About Text-Critical Methodology  
 
 
The textual evidence cited above presents a situation where one reading (that of 
LXX) is supported by very ancient manuscript evidence (notably Qumran), while the 
other (MT's reading) has a preponderance of the support, thereby creating an "oldest 
versus  most" predicament.  As in similar New Testament cases, the correct reading 
cannot be verified merely by counting manuscripts, but by weighing them.  Hence it 
matters little that the LXX reading is "outnumbered," especially since the more numerous 
                                                 
10 Manfried Dietrich, Oswald Loretz, and Joaquin Sanmartin, eds., The Cuneiform Alphabetic Texts from 
Ugarit, Ras Ibn Hani and Other Places, KTU:  second, enlarged edition (Munster:  Ugarit-Verlag, 1995), 
18 (herafter = KTU).  The reading in the article is from KTU 1.4:VI.46. 
11 Job 38:7 informs us that the heavenly host was present at creation. 
12 David E. Stevens, “Does Deuteronomy 32:8 Refer to ‘Sons of God’ or ‘Sons of Israel’?,” Bibliotheca 
Sacra 154 (April-June 1997):  139. 

---PAGE---
4 
sources are all recent as manuscript evidence goes, and in fact are interdependent, not 
independent, witnesses.  Additonally, the assumption of MT-superiority should have no 
place in the objective evaluation of variants in the Old Testament text.  Naturally, it 
would be equally fallacious to presuppose the priority of the LXX.  Very simply, no text  
should be assigned a priori  superiority at any point in a text-critical investigation.  
Determination of the best reading must be based on internal considerations, not 
uncritical, external presumptions about divine guidance over the "correct" text.   
 
Unfortunately, the notion of the presumed sanctity of MT still persists.  The 
dictum that MT is to be preferred over all other traditions whenever it cannot be faulted 
linguistically or for its content, unless in isolated cases there is good reason for favoring 
another tradition, is all too enthusiastically echoed.13  This idea seems to suggest that 
whenever an MT reading could  be accepted it should  be accepted.  Such an approach  
hardly does justice to non-MT readings that also could  be acceptable on their own 
linguistic and contextual terms.  Put another way, the above mantra never addresses why  
we must hold MT in such esteem.  Where there are wide and significant textual 
divergencies between MT and the LXX, many textual studies have shown that the 
Qumran witnesses demonstrate the reliability of the transmission of the Hebrew text 
underlying the LXX.14  For example, it is well known that the MT of the books of 
Samuel is in poor condition in a number of places, suffering  instances of significant 
haplography.15  The books of Kings are riddled with both short and lengthy pluses and 
minuses, transpositions, and chronological differences.16   Likewise, portions of the MT 
of Ezekiel, especially chapters 1 and 10, could serve as a veritable digest of textual 
corruptions.17  Lastly, the MT of the book of Jeremiah is fully one-sixthlonger  than the 
text of the LXX.18   If the widely-followed principle of textual criticism that ectio brevior 
praeferenda est  (“the shorter reading is to be preferred” – due to a scribe’s tendency to 
add rather than delete words) has any merit at all, the MT of Jeremiah would have to be 
considered an undeniably expansionistic text. 
 
Prejudicial Evaluation of Texts Outside the MT Tradition 
 
 
Judging by the survival in Old Testament textual criticism of a "textus receptus" 
approach like the one which once held sway in New Testament textual criticism, there 
has apparently been little thoughtful consideration as to how  the MT came to be 
considered the “received text."  Just because the MT was the received text of the 
medieval Masoretes does not prove it merits textual priority among today’s extant 
witnesses, or that it had textual priority in biblical times. The MT rose to prominence 
                                                 
13 Ernst Wurthwein, The Text of the Old Testament, translated by Peter R. Ackroyd (New York:  
MacMillan Company, 1957), 76–82. 
14Use Ulrich on Samuel here. 
15 P. Kyle McCarter, I Samuel, Anchor Bible, vol. 8 (New York:  Doubleday, 1980); idem, Textual 
Criticism:  Recovering the Text of the Hebrew Bible  (Philadelphia:  Fortress Press, 1986), 38. 
16 Tov, Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible, 142. 
17 Daniel Block, "Text and Emotion:  A Study in the 'Corruptions' in Ezekiel's Inaugural Vision (Ezekiel 
1:4-28)," CBQ  50 (July 1988):  418–442. 
18 Tov, Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible, 320 ff. 

---PAGE---
5 
only after centuries of textual diversity, and not, as noted above, by "intrinsic factors 
related to the textual transmission, but by political and socioreligious events and 
developments."19  
 
The evidence from Qumran unquestionably testifies to a certifiable textual 
plurality  among Jews in Palestine for the period between the third century B.C. and the 
first century A.D.20  Three independent texts of the Old Testament, the precursory forms 
of MT, the LXX, and the SP existed and are attested at Qumran without any evidence for 
the  suppression of the non-MT texts.  The mere fact that the Hebrew base for the LXX 
was found at Qumran as early as the third century B.C.and was not suppressed  by the 
Qumranites demonstrates that this text was not  confined to Egypt’s borders or 
considered  inferior.  As further proof of textual diversity, the Qumran material also 
contains  "independent" or "unaligned" texts," which exhibit equal agreement and 
disagreement with the three major recognized textual traditions of MT, LXX, and the 
Samaritan Pentateuch.21  The Qumran fragments that support the LXX “sons of God” 
reading, 4QDeut j,n, are among the unaligned texts.22   
 
Two points derive from this rehearsal of the textual plurality at Qumran.  First, no 
evidence exists in the actual textual data that the Jews held a negative view of Hebrew 
texts not grouped among those which would later receive the appellation "Masoretic." 
Second, the undeniable textual diversity at Qumran argues against  any suggestion that 
the Qumranites altered a text ultimately used by the LXX translators as their Vorlage.  
Besides the chronological and logistical difficulties of such an idea, the question remains:  
If the Qumran members were in the habit of altering texts to reflect allegedly strange 
angelic views or Gnostic tendencies, why did they leave so many texts within each  of 
the major textual strains unaltered?  Put another way, why did the inhabitants of Qumran 
allow so many passages of the Hebrew Bible which point to God’s uniqueness, 
omnipotence, and sole sovereignty to stay in the texts they deposited in the nearby caves?   
It hardly makes sense to sneak one alteration into Deuteronomy 32:8 while leaving 
hundreds of other “non dualistic” texts remain.  
 
Evaluating the Internal Text-Critical Evidence for Deuteronomy 32:8 
 
Two explanations might be offered by those who assume the priority of MT as to 
why Deuteronomy 32:8 reads “sons of God" in some manuscripts, including the Qumran 
material.  One option is that this reading should simply be regarded as an intentional error 
                                                 
19 Tov, "Textual Criticism (OT)," 395, 407.  Tov summarizes the historical situation as follows:  "By the 
end of the 1st century A.D. the LXX had been accepted by Christianity and abandoned by Jews.  Copies of 
the Samaritan Pentateuch were available, but in the meantime that sect had become an independent 
religion, so that their texts were considered Samaritan, not Jewish anymore.  The Qumran sect, which had 
preserved a multitude of texts, did not exist after the destruction of the temple.  Therefore the sole texts that 
existed in this period were the ones that were copied and distributed by the central group in Judaism . . . 
This situation gave rise to the wrong conclusion that the MT had 'ousted' the other texts." 
20 Tov, Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible, 116–117.  See also S. Talmon, "The Old Testament Text," 
in P.R. Ackroyd and C.F. Evans, eds., Cambridge History of the Bible, vol. 1 (Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press, 1963):  159–199. 
21 Ibid., 395, 402, 404, 406. 
22 Tov, "Textual Criticism (OT)," 402. 

---PAGE---
6 
reflecting the theological predilections of Qumran and the LXX translators.
  This theory 
has already been called into question. The other option would involve an unintentional 
origin for the variant.  Specifically, it could be argued that accidental omission of  the 
consonants r#oy from the word l)r#oy occured by parablepsis, leaving l) ynb in the 
text in the place of  l)r#oy ynb.23  This explanation satisfies Stevens, for it “gives 
priority to the Masoretic text.”24  Exactly why  the student of the text should strive to give 
MT priority is not explained.  Nevertheless, the proposal is plausible, since parablepsis is 
a very common cause of textual corruption.  This explanation is less than satisfactory for 
at least two reasons. 
First, one could just as well argue that r#oy was added  to the text.  This is hardly 
a satisfying response, however, for it is as much of a speculation as the competing 
proposition.  The real problem with the parablepsis proposal is that, while it accounts for  
the consonants l) in the text, it fails to adequately explain how the consonants Myhw-
 would have come to be added  after l) to the text underlying the LXX reading.  It is 
particularly significant in this regard that the texts from Qumran which support the LXX 
clearly do not  read the consonants l) ynb as this explanation would postulate, for in 
one text, 4QDeutq , there are clearly additional spaces for additional consonants after the 
l of the word l).  The other Dead Sea text which supports the LXX reading, 4QDeutj , 
certainly reads Myhl) ynb.25   By way of explanation, if all the witnesses to the “sons of 
God” variant read  l) ynb, this explanation would carry more weight, for it would be 
very easy to argue that  l) ynb was indeed the result of  the loss of  r#oy before an 
original  l)r#oy ynb.   However, when a Hebrew text reads Myhl) ynb as in the case of 
4QDeutj, or  [My]l) ynb as various scrolls scholars have filled in the lacunae of the 
4QDeutq , one must explain the added consonants, since a word such as Myhl)r#oy is 
nonsensical.  Advocates of such a parablepsis hypothesis would logically be forced to 
argue that the text in question not only suffered parablepsis, but that a scribe later 
deliberately inserted the extra letters after the parablepsis occurred.  The unlikelihood of 
this intellectual retreat is manifest.  Typically, scribes altered  or deleted  letters 
deliberately to “protect” God or  to correct theology (such as with the tiqqune sopherim 
).26  The occasions where scribes desired the reader to observe a different consonantal 
                                                 
23 Stevens (137-138) calls this omission homoioteleuton (a skip of the eye due to same or similar endings 
of words), but parablepsis is the more accurate term describing what Stevens believes occurred, the 
copyist's eye skipping from the yodh at the end of  ynb to the aleph  of  l), thereby causing the alleged 
omission of consonants.  The variant really would not have been caused by a similarity in word endings, 
but would actually be a kind of "mental parablepsis," due to the familiarity of the scribe with the phrases 
Myhl) ynb or  Myl) ynb.  What this requires is that the scribe would have written "ynb" and then,  
mentally expecting Myhl) or  Myl) to follow, wrote "l)" instead of  l)r#oy.  
24 Ibid., 138. 
25 Tov, Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible, 269. 
26 Tov, Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible, 64–66.  See also Carmel McCarthy, The Tiqqune Sopherim 
and Other Theological Corrections in the Masoretic Text of the Old Testament (Gottingen:  Vandenhoeck 
und Ruprecht, 1981):  211–214; and Ellis Brotzman, Old Testament Textual Criticism:  A Practical 
Introduction (Grand Rapids:  Baker Book House, 1994):  117–118. 

---PAGE---
7 
text are well known, such as with the system of Kethiv-Qere  or through suspended 
letters.27  There is no such Masoretic directive for Deuteronomy 32:8.   
Second, and perhaps even more damaging to the proposed parablepsis explanation 
that an original "sons of Israel" was unintentionally corrupted to “sons of God” in 
Deuteronomy 32:8, is that there exists another text-critical problem in Deuteronomy 32 
in which divine  beings - "sons of  Myhl) / Myl)" are the focus (v. 43)!28  
Deuteronomy  32:43 reads differently in the MT, the LXX, and a Qumran text.  Tigay has 
the three texts laid out in parallel in his commentary on Deuteronomy.  The text is shown 
by Tigay in its literary structure of bicolons (note the references to “divinities” and “sons 
of the divine”):29 
 
Masoretic Text 
 
4QDeutq 
 
 
LXX 
 
A1. O nations, rejoice His people  
O heavens, rejoice with Him 
 
O heavens, rejoice with Him 
A2.. 
 
 
 
Bow to Him, all divinities 
 
Bow to Him, all sons of the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
divine 
A3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
O nations, rejoice with His  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people 
A4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And let all angels of the divine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strengthen themselves in Him. 
B1. For He’ll avenge the blood of  
For He’ll avenge the blood of 
 
For He’ll avenge the blood of 
B2. His servants, 
 
 
His sons,  
 
 
His sons, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Be vengeful 
       And wreak vengeance 
 
And wreak vengeance  
 
And wreak vengeance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And recompense justice 
       On His foes, 
 
 
on His foes, 
 
 
on His foes, 
C1. 
 
 
 
Requite those who reject Him, 
 
Requite those who reject Him, 
C2.  And will 
 
 
And will  
 
 
And the Lord will 
       Cleanse His people’s land. 
 
Cleanse His people’s land. 
 
Cleanse His people’s land. 
 
 
Tigay asserts that the MT here is demonstrably incomplete when the structure of 
the text is analyzed and the resulting minuses are assessed.30  It is significant that the MT 
lacks a parallel colon in what should be the first pairing (or double pairing if one follows 
the LXX).  Even more striking is the fact that this missing colon is the one in which 
reference is made to divine beings in the Qumran and LXX texts.  In the Qumran and 
LXX texts, every colon has its partner.  This argues strongly that the MT originally had a 
pairing of colons (a bicolon), a pairing that was deliberately eliminated to avoid the 
reference to other “divine beings."31  Tigay provides a well-reasoned explanation for the 
superfluous nature of the LXX’s extra bicolon (A3-A4) and some of the alternate 
wordings.32  What is significant in his argumentation is that while the other MT minuses 
                                                 
27 Tov, Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible, 57.   
28The translation of the LXX used by Tigay could reflect  Myl) instead of  Myhl) since "divine" rather 
than "God" is chosen as the translation.  If the former option was indeed the Vorlage reading, a translation 
of "divine ones" is more accurate. 
29 Jeffrey H. Tigay, The JPS Torah Commentary:  Deuteronomy  (Philadelphia:  Jewish Publication 
Society, 1996), 516. 
30 Ibid., 314, 516ff. 
31 Ibid., 516. 
32 Ibid., 516ff. 

---PAGE---
8 
can be explained by haplography, the absence of the colon that would have made 
reference to divine beings cannot be so explained.33    
What are the implications of this “parallel corruption”?  For one, those who 
defend MT priority would have to argue for accidental changes in Deuteronomy 32:8 (the 
missing  -r#oy) and 32:43 that produce false readings in favor of angelic beings in both  
cases, while simultaneously accounting for the full range of consonants in Myhl) in 
4QDeutj .  Such a coincidence is possible, but it stretches credulity to argue that the MT 
of Deuteronomy 32:8 and 43 best represents the original text when the exclusion of 
divine beings in 32:43 is so obviously a textual minus, and its conceptual parallel in 32:8 
cannot coherently account for how the LXX reading for 32:8 may have arisen.  It is far 
more likely both texts were intentionally altered in MT  for the same  reason:  to 
eliminate a reference to divine beings in the name of expunging allegedly polytheistic 
language.   It is inconceivable to suppose that a scribe would have done the reverse, 
altering an innocuous l)r#oy ynb to a potentially explosive Myhl) ynb.  The LXX 
reading therefore sufficiently explains how the MT reading could have arisen, but the 
alternative fails this test. 
 
DEUTERONOMY 32:8 IN LIGHT OF GOD'S DIVINE COUNCIL IN THE HEBREW BIBLE  
 
 
Although some may fear that to adopt the reading of LXX amounts to  embracing 
the notion that Yahweh is the author of polytheism, nothing could be further from the 
truth.   In fact, a proper understanding of the concept of the divine council in the Old 
Testament provides a decisive argument in favor of the LXX / Qumran reading.     
It is no secret that the Old Testament often reflects literary and religious contact 
between Israel and her ancient near eastern neighbors.  One example of such contact  
concerns a "divine council" or “divine assembly” presided over by a chief deity.34  A  
number of passages in the Hebrew Bible depict God presiding over a council of divine 
beings, and these passages often describe the divine council's membership and function 
with precise terminology utilized in ancient near eastern literature for the judicial 
oversight of their pantheons over the cosmos.  Of particular interest to the study at hand 
are the Ugaritic texts, since that language bears such a close linguistic affinity to Biblical 
Hebrew.35    
                                                 
33 Ibid., 516ff. 
34 The major work on the divine council is by E. Theodore Mullen, The Divine Council in Canaanite and 
Early Hebrew Literature, Harvard Semitic Monographs, no. 24 (Missoula, Montana:  Scholars Press, 
1980).  Related to Mullen’s work, but focusing on more specific aspects of the divine council are:  Lowell 
K. Handy, Among the Host of Heaven:  The Syro–Palestinian Pantheon as Bureaucracy (Winona Lake:  
Eisenbrauns, 1994), and Conrad L’Heureux, Rank among the Canaanite Gods:  El, Ba(al, and the 
Repha)im, Harvard Semitic Monographs, no. 21 (Scholars Press, 1979). 
35 Stanislav Segert, A Basic Grammar of the Ugaritic Language:  With Selected Texts and Glossary 
(Berkeley:  University of California Press, 1985), x, 13–15.  The present study will focus on material from 
Ugarit, but the concepts delineated in the body of this paper can also be found throughout the literature of 
ancient Phoenicia, Mesopotamia, and Egypt. 

---PAGE---
9 
 
The Divine Council in the Old Testament 
 
One of the examples of the divine council assembled for deliberation in the 
Hebrew Bible is I Kings 22:19-23 (cf. II Chron. 18:18-22).36  I Kings 22:1-18 introduces 
the political alliance forged between Jehoshaphat of Judah and the king of Israel  for 
invading Ramoth-Gilead, the rubber-stamping of the plan by four hundred prophets of 
Israel, and Jehoshaphat’s insistence on hearing from a true prophet  of Yahweh 
concerning the matter.  The king of Israel reveals that there is indeed a prophet of 
Yahweh, Micaiah ben Imlah, but  that Micaiah never prophesies anything favorable 
concerning him.  Micaiah is summoned, and at first he mockingly prophesies blessing for 
the invasion, but his duplicity is detected immediately by Jehoshaphat.  This sets the 
stage for Micaiah’s genuine vision (emphasis mine): 
 
19 Micaiah continued, "Therefore hear the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting 
on his throne with all the host of heaven standing around him on his right and on his 
left. 20 And the LORD said, 'Who will entice Ahab into attacking Ramoth Gilead and 
going to his death there?' One suggested this, and another that. 21 Finally, a spirit came 
forward, stood before the LORD and said, 'I will entice him.' 22  'By what means?' the 
LORD asked. 'I will go out and be a lying spirit in the mouths of all his prophets,' he 
said. 'You will succeed in enticing him,' said the LORD. 'Go and do it.' 23  So now the 
LORD has put a lying spirit in the mouths of all these prophets of yours. The LORD has 
decreed disaster for you."  
 
In a scene that resembles Ugaritic council scenes, Yahweh is pictured as the chief 
deity,37 enthroned among the members of His council before directly addressing its 
members, who “stand” (a technical term38) before Him.39  The question asked by 
Yahweh occurs in a form paralleled in Ugaritic literature and other passages involving 
Yahweh’s presence in the Hebrew Bible.40  The omniscient leader then approves the 
course of action He knows will be successful, and the messenger (the “spirit”41 here, but 
often a prophet) is commissioned.  It is not that Yahweh is lacking ideas, or that the 
members of the council exercise any actual authority, but rather that the council only 
                                                 
36 Other than the two primary examples of the council in the Hebrew Bible offered in the body of this 
paper, see Job 1,2 and Zech. 3:1–8. 
37 The chief deity and leader of the council at Ugarit was El.  The Hebrew text makes it clear that El is 
Israel’s God as well (although the l)' of the Bible does not share his Ugaritic counterpart's behaviors; cf. 
l)'rF#o;yI yh'$l)v l)' - “El, the God of Israel”; Gen. 33:20), and that Yahweh is El (cf. Deut. 7:9; 10:17; II 
Sam. 22:31 [parallelism]; Ps. 85:9; Isa. 42:5; Jer. 32:8).  The equation in the literature is also seen by virtue 
of the numerous epithets at Ugarit for the high god El that are used of Yahweh in the Hebrew Bible (see 
Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic,  44–76). 
38 Mullen, The Divine Council, p. 207, 209–226.  In this regard, it is interesting to note Isaiah 6:2 in the 
LXX, where the angelic beings in the passage stand before Yahweh, not above him as in MT. 
39 Cf. KTU 1.16.V.9–28; Ugaritica V.2.I.2–4.  See Mullen, The Divine Council,  205ff. 
40 Cf. KTU 1.16.V.10–11, 14–15, 17–18, 20–21. 
41 This is a common designation for Yahweh’s / the council’s messengers.  See Mullen, The Divine 
Council,  206. 

---PAGE---
10 
serves to “reemphasize and execute His decisions.”42  This is the same pattern as in the 
Ugaritic council texts.43   Micaiah in this instance is permitted to observe the 
deliberations of the divine “boardroom meeting” and thus pronounce with certainty “thus 
saith the LORD” as a messenger of the divine assembly. 
 
A second example of the divine council in the Hebrew Bible is Psalm 82.  Setting 
the Hebrew text44 in relation to the translation brings out the now familiar council 
language and the plurality of the Myhi$l)V  in question: 
 
1 God (Myhi$l)V) standeth in the congregation of the mighty (lae-td;[]B;); he 
judgeth among the gods (Myhi$l)V).  
2 How long will ye judge (WjP.v.Ti) unjustly, and accept (Waf.Ti) the persons of 
the wicked? Selah.  
3 Defend (Wjp.vi) the poor and fatherless: do justice (WqyDic.h;) to the afflicted 
and needy.  
4 Deliver (WjL.P; ) the poor and needy: rid [them] (WlyCihi) out of the hand of the 
wicked.  
5 They (the gods) know not (W[d.y" al), neither will they (the gods) understand 
(Wnybiy" al{w>); they (the gods) walk on (WkL'h;t.yI) in darkness: all the 
foundations of the earth are out of course.  
6 I have said, Ye [are] gods (~T,a; Myhi$l)V); and all of you [are] children of the 
most High (~k,L.Ku !Ayl.[, ynEb.W). 
7 But ye shall die (!WtWmT.)45 like Adam,46 and fall (WlPoTi) like one of the 
Shining Ones.47  
                                                 
42 Ibid., 207. 
43 Ibid., 206. 
44 The text of MT is used here.  As is noted in several of the studies cited subsequently, the only 
meaningful variant in the text is whether the first ~yhil{a/ should be replaced by hwhy.  The choice makes 
no difference for the interpretation of the psalm. 
45 The verb form here, !WtWmT. , is from the same root as used for the pronouncement on humankind in 
Gen. 2:17; 3:4.  In the latter instance, the form is identical, save for defective spelling (!WtmuT.). 
46 The Hebrew here is ~d'a'K. , and is usually translated "like men."  Aside from the connection with the 
verb mentioned above in the ensuing discussion, the translation choice here is based on the work of Mullen 
(239-240) and Hugh Rowland Page, The Myth of Cosmic Rebellion:  A Study of  Its Reflexes in Ugaritic 
and Biblical Literature (Leiden:  E. J. Brill, 1996), 158–164.  Page's is the most thorough and up to date 
work comparing the passages in the Hebrew Bible that speak of a cosmic rebellion with those of Ugarit.   
The translation choice "Adam" reflects the connection that exists between (1) presence of  the "Shining 
One" (Lucifer) in Isaiah 14:12–15 in the holy Mount - the Mount of the Assembly (the place where the 
council met) and the designation of Eden, the garden of God, as the Mount of Assembly in Ezekiel 28; and 
(2) the reference to a certain "Shining One" in Psalm 82:7 (see the preceding note on the verbal root for 
"you shall die," and the ensuing note below). 
47 The Hebrew here is ~yriF'h; dx;a;k. , which is usually translated "like one of the princes," under the 
assumption that the noun  MyrI#of2ha is related to the Akkadian  s/arru, meaning "ruler, prince."  This is the 
correct Akkadian cognate, but contrary to the assertion that the related verbal root  s/araru  most likely does 
not mean "rise in splendor" (in reference to the sun, and so "shine"), subsequent scholarship has 

---PAGE---
11 
8 Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all nations. 
 
 
This psalm has generated much scholarly controversy.48  As many scholars who 
have tackled its contents have noted, the crux interpretum  of the psalm is determining 
what  Myhi$l)V means in verses 1b and 6a.49  How can God / Myhi$l)V be said to be 
standing in the council of God / lae in the midst of (a singular) God / Myhi$l)V ?  It would 
seem obvious that the second Myhi$l)V (v. 1b) must be pluralized, but since this allegedly 
smacks of polytheism, many commentators have resisted the translation “gods.”  Three 
major interpretations therefore exist for the  Myhi$l)V of 1b and 6a:  (1) they are Israelite 
rulers and judges; (2) they are the rulers and judges of the nations; (3) they are members 
of the divine council / divine beings.  In reality, the latter two options are both correct, 
and  must be combined for an accurate interpretation of the psalm.50  
 
As Cyrus Gordon pointed out over sixty years ago, translating Myhi$l)V as “rulers” 
or “judges” is an option that lacks validity, and is an example of theologically 
“protecting” God.51  Since Gordon adequately chronicles the examples where Myhi$l)V is 
only speculatively translated as “rulers” or “judges,”52 and demonstrates in each example 
that such a translation choice is unnecessary, this paper will focus on features of the 
psalm that compel the conclusion that Myhi$l)V in v. 1b and 6a should be translated 
“gods” or, better, “divine beings.”53 
                                                                                                                                                 
demonstrated otherwise (see The Brown-Driver-Briggs-Gesenius Hebrew and English Lexicon, ed. Jay P. 
Green (Peabody, Mass.:  Hendrickson, 1979), 977b and 978a; hereafter, BDB ).  While there may be some 
question that the verbal  form s/araru  may not be used with "shine" as its meaning, the adjective form 
s/aru4ru  certainly does mean "shining," as evidenced by its use to describe the planet Venus in astronomical 
texts (Page, 97, note 134) .  Psalm 82:7 could therefore contain a substantive use of the cognate adjective 
(see also Mullen, The Divine Council, 239–240).   The reference to a "Shining One" in 82:7 is paralleled by 
Isaiah 14:12-15 and Ezekiel 28:12-17, where divine beings are in view (or where tales of divine beings 
form the backdrop for these passages).  Ezekiel 28:13-16 and Isaiah 14:12-15 provide an overt linguistic 
connection between Eden and the holy Mount of Assembly where the divine council at Ugarit and in the 
Hebrew Bible held its meetings (cf. the ensuing discussion of the vocabulary used at Ugarit and in the 
Hebrew Bible).  The elohim of Psalm 82:7 will die like Adam and fall like one of the "shining ones" did 
(cf. esp. Ezek. 28:12-17 here).  The point of the verse is that the divine beings judged in the Psalm will be 
(or were) stripped of immortality and cast from their high estate, just as Adam and that divine being who 
was punished in the same manner earlier had been.  It should be pointed out that this argument from the 
cognates is not necessary  for proving that the personages in Psalm 82 are divine beings, since r#of  in its 
meaning of "prince" is used in Daniel to identify divine beings - those  ~yhil{a/ who still rule the nations - 
and Michael, guardian of God's portion, Israel  (Dan. 10:13, 20-21; 12:1; cp. Deut. 4:19; 32:8-9).   
48 See Julian Morgenstern, “The Mythological Background of Psalm 82,” Hebrew Union College Annual 
XIV (1939): 29-98; W. S. Prinsloo, “Psalm 82: Once Again, Gods or Men?”  Biblica 76:2 (1995), 219–
228; and Lowell Handy, “Sounds, Words and Meanings in Psalm 82,” Journal for the Study of the Old 
Testament 47 (1990), 51–66. 
49 Prinsloo, “Psalm 82: Once Again, Gods or Men?”  219. 
50 Mullen, The Divine Council,  228, n. 195. 
51 Cyrus Gordon, “ Myhl) in Its Reputed Meaning of  Rulers, Judges,” Journal of Biblical Literature  54 
(1935):  139–144. 
52 For example, see BDB, 43a. 
53 While this author agrees with Gordon that ~yhil{a/ need not (and should not) be translated “judges” or 
“rulers” in Psalm 82 and his other examples, he disagrees with Gordon’s conclusion that in at least two of 

---PAGE---
12 
 
Several external considerations point to verses 1b and 6a as describing the divine 
council and its “divine beings.”  First, the fact that the Myhi$l)V in 6a are called  
NwOyl;(e  yn"b2; is a strong argument for their divine nature, because NwOyl;(e is a completely 
transparent title for deity, in both Hebrew and Ugaritic.  The word refers only to God / El 
in the Bible and Ugaritic religious texts.54  The point here is that the divine character of 
the offspring of El in the Ugaritic texts is beyond question.   That the same descriptive 
appellation for those offspring are  used many times in the Hebrew Bible of nonhuman 
inhabitants of the heavens makes the translation “human judges” nonsensical55 and 
requires ignoring the comparative semitic philology.  Second, the terms and themes in 
this psalm are present in Ugaritic literature.  Elyo4n,  princes, gods, are all present in the 
Ugaritic poem “the Gracious Gods,” and it is quite telling that the notion above in Psalm 
82:7 of the Myhi$l)v  “falling” like “one of the Shining Ones” is found “in a specific 
episode of Canaanite mythology, in which the fall of one of the bn  s/rm  ("sons of the 
shining ones") of the heavenly congregation was depicted.”56  Third, the fact that the 
psalm speaks of rendering justice to the poor and needy does not argue for human judges, 
since the council terminology from Sumer, Akkad, and Ugarit “referred originally to the 
political organ of a primitive democracy, a phenomenon which can be discerned in the 
pantheons of various non-Israelite cultures.”57  Lastly, verses such as Isaiah 24:21 (“In 
that day the LORD will punish the powers in the heavens above and the kings on the 
earth below”) clearly distinguish between the divine beings of Yahweh’s host and earthly 
rulers. 
                                                                                                                                                 
these instances (Exodus 21:6 and 22:6-7) one should understand the term as referring to household 
gods/idols.  Gordon cites certain oath-taking examples in the Nuzi dialect of Akkadian in favor of his 
decision, but admits that other Akkadian parallels (e.g. Hammurabi’s Code) have a singular deity in view.  
This author would prefer to translate ~yhil{a/ in these texts (and others) as simply “God” or “gods,” and not 
“household gods/idols” or “judges.”  That such an effort has been exerted to identify these beings as 
humans ought also to inform the reader that ~yhil{a/ in these texts (and especially Psalm 82) does not  refer 
to mere angels (i.e., Myk)lm).  The comparative semitic data make it clear that the members of the council 
had a higher status than these “messenger” beings. 
54 Genesis 14:18ff. (God Most High).  On the use of  NwOyl;(e"at Ugarit as either an epithet of El or a 
“double name of a single god,” see Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic,  51.  The word’s use in 
Genesis 14:18–22, especially along with the phrase “Creator of heaven and earth” (Cre)FwF MyIma#$F hnEqo ; 
14:22) presents a firm  linguistic appearance in the Hebrew text of one of Canaanite El’s titles (qanu )ars[).  
See Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic, 50–52. 
55 See Gerald Cooke, “The Sons of (the) God(s),” Zeitschrift fur die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 76 
(1964):  34. 
56 Ibid., 34. 
57 Matitiahu Tsevat, “God and the Gods in Assembly,” Hebrew Union College Annual  40-41 (1969-
1970),  127; Page, The Myth of Cosmic Rebellion, 158–164.  In all these ancient religions, as well as the 
theology of the Hebrew Bible, the gods / God and their/ his council were supposed to render right 
judgment for the oppressed and the poor (see Mullen, The Divine Council,  231ff.; see esp. 233–38).  The 
earth itself was founded on justice (Isa. 28:16ff.) and each member of the council had his own earthly 
responsibilities (Deut. 4:19 and 32:8-9, reading with LXX and Qumran).  As Cyrus Gordon also notes, 
“The duty of rulers (gods and kings alike) is to  protect the weak from the strong” (Cyrus Gordon, “History 
of Religion in Psalm 82,” in Biblical and Near Eastern Studies:  Essays in Honor of William Sanford 
LaSor, ed. Gary A. Tuttle (Grand Rapids:  William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1978), 129–31 (see 
esp. 130). 

---PAGE---
13 
 
Internal features of Psalm 82 place the argument that Myhi$l)v in v. 1b and 6a are 
divine beings and not human judges beyond dispute.  Two recent articles on Psalm 82 
have produced a number of structural proofs in favor of divine beings rather than 
humans.58 Two  observations will suffice here: 
 
1.  Psalm 82:1 has a chiastic structure that compels the understanding that the 
second Myhi$l)V  refers to divine, not human, beings: 
+p2o#$;yI    Myhi$l)V brEqEb2;       l)'-tdA(Jb2a    bc2fnI Myhi$l)V  
   a                  b                              b                  a 
 
2 The particle  Nk')F  in verse 7 indicates “a strong antithetical relationship with 
v. 6.”59  The presence of  yTir.m;a' introducing the clause prior to Nk')F  has 
been demonstrated to require a translation of roughly “I had thought . . . 
but.”60  The contrast is, of course, between the speaker of verse 6, Yahweh 
(who in either view is the only one who has the authority to render the death 
sentence for these  Myhi$l)V ) and the  Myhi$l)V of  verse 6a – the word being 
in parallel to NwOyl;(e  yn"b2; .   Consequently, interpreting the phrase “you shall 
die like Adam” to be referring to human judges would contradict the 
contrasts required by the syntax.  It would also require ignoring the parallel 
here with the judgment on Adam and Eve.  The point is not that the 
Myhi$l)V were put to death at the moment Yahweh judged them, but that they 
must  die as a result of their actions (i.e., they would become mortal).61  
Moreover, it is patently illogical.  As Smick noted, “if they are going to die 
like mortals, they are not mortals.”62  The immortality of those suffering this 
judgment is clearly presupposed.63 
 
The Divine Council and the Vocabulary of Biblical Hebrew 
                                                 
58 Prinsloo, “Psalm 82: Once Again, Gods or Men?” 222ff.; Handy, “Sounds, Words, and Meanings in 
Psalm 82,” 51-66.  See also Mullen, The Divine Council,  226ff. 
59 Prinsloo,  “Psalm 82: Once Again, Gods or Men?” 226. 
60 Morgenstern, 33. 
61 Morgenstern,  73–74.  This does not rule out the possibility, as some argue, that Adam and Eve 
possessed contingent immortality before the Fall.  In that case, their punishment would involve removing 
that contingency (namely the tree of life from which they ate) which maintained their immortality.  The 
effect would be the same – they were now fully mortal, and could not avoid death.  
62 Elmer Smick, “Mythopoetic Language in the Psalms,” Westminster Theological Journal 44 (1982):  95. 
63 It does no good to suggest that the "Myhi$l)V"in question are humans who thought themselves to be 
divine, for the text does not say this, and, more importantly, because it would put such words in the mouth 
of Yahweh (the verb is first singular, not second plural).  Lastly, to object that it is impossible to conceive 
of gods dying like men in an attempt to argue for human beings as the  Myhi$l)V" is to actually sound 
polytheistic in orientation, for the objection would be based on the assumption that the plural 
  Myhi$l)V  have the same qualitative essence (noncontingent immortality) as Yahweh.  The point here is 
that if more than one being possessed noncontingent immortality, the result would be true polytheism.  It is 
necessary to recognize a distinction between Deity (God) and divinity (god-likeness) as a solution for 
reconciling the plural Myhi$l)V"and Israelite monotheism.  

---PAGE---
14 
 
The texts above (and others) are all the more convincing once the Ugaritic 
terminology for the divine council is compared with the vocabulary of biblical Hebrew.  
Such a comparison yields both semantic congruences and exact philological equivalents.  
 
Terminology for the Assembly64 
 
 
The literature of Ugarit has a number of designations for the divine assembly/ 
council.  The two most common at Ugarit are ph}r , with its related form mph}r , both 
meaning “congregation, assembly,”65 and dr ,66 meaning “generation, assemblage.”67  
The phrases ph}r )ilm  (“congregation of the gods”),  mph}rt  bn )ilm  (“congregation of the 
sons of the gods”), and dr bn )il  (“generation of the sons of El”) are quite common.68  
None of these forms are used in the Hebrew Bible in terms of exact linguistic  
equivalence, though their conceptual  equivalence will become clear. 
 
A common appellation for the divine assembly at Ugarit is (dt )ilm  (“assembly of 
the gods” 69), a phrase that corresponds exactly to the one in Psalm 82:1 (“the 
l)' tdA(jbA2 ; the “assembly of God”).  Another biblical Hebrew term for the council that 
has an equivalent in Ugaritic is dwOs (“assembly”70).  For example, in Jeremiah 23:18, 22 
one reads:71 
 
(18) But which of them has stood in the council (dwOsb2;) of the LORD to see or to 
hear his word? Who has listened and heard his word? 
(22) But if they had stood in my council (ydiwOsb2;), they would have proclaimed 
my words to my people and would have turned them from their evil ways and 
from their evil deeds. 
 
 
Reminiscent of this scene is Isaiah’s vision of Yahweh in Isaiah, where Isaiah, 
upon seeing Yahweh enthroned and ministered to by seraphim, hears Yahweh speak:  
“Who shall I send, and who will go for us?”  The winged creatures in the chapter have 
undeniable parallels in the Ugaritic council scenes.72  In fact, visions or auditory 
                                                 
64 The fullest treatment of this topic occurs in Mullen, The Divine Council,  111–127.  
65 Marjo Christina Annette Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds:  Ugaritic and Hebrew Descriptions of the Divine 
(Munster:  Ugarit Verlag, 1990), 269; Cyrus Gordon, Ugaritic Manual, Analecta Orientalia 35 (Rome:  
Pontificium Institutum Biblicum, 1955), 312. 
66 There is no Canaanite shift in Ugaritic, hence long “a” instead of an “o” vowel. 
67 Gordon, Ugaritic Manual, 256. 
68 For example, KTU 1.47:29; 1.148; 1.40:25; 1.65:3; 1.2 (cf. E. Theodore Mullen, “Divine Assembly,” in 
Anchor Bible Dictionary, vol. II, ed. D. N. Freedman (New York:  Doubleday, 1992), 214–215. 
69 Gordon, Ugaritic Manual, 303.   For example, see KTU 1.15:II.7,11 
70 For example, see Psalm 55:14 (Heb. = 15; translated “throng” in NIV); Jer. 6:11 (“assembly” in KJV); 
Prov. 15:22 (“advisers” in NIV).  For the Ugaritic, see KTU 1.20:I.4; Korpel, 271. 
71 Note the translation “counsel” instead of “council” in the KJV here as another example of how the 
linguistic parallels with the ancient near eastern “council” terminology are missed. 
72 Ibid., 207.  Mullen argues that the winged creatures/ seraphim are council members, but elsewhere in his 
book Mullen notes that such fiery (cf. the root s[rp for the seraphim) messengers are mere emissaries to the 
council at Ugarit (140).  The major study in regard to the hierarchicy of divine beings is that of Lowell 

---PAGE---
15 
revelations of Yahweh and His divine council were viewed in the Hebrew Bible as an 
authentication of the veracity of the prophet’s message and status – a sort of test of true 
“propheticity.”73   
 
Terminology for the Members of the Assembly74 
 
 
Ugaritic regularly refers to heavenly beings as ph}r kkbm  (the “congregation of 
the stars”75), language corresponding with rqe$b yb'k;wOk2 (“morning stars”; in parallelism 
with the “sons of God” in Job 38:7) and l)' yb'k;wOk (the “stars of God”; Isa. 14:13).  
Aside from the context of these references, each of which clearly points to personal 
beings, not astronomical phenomena, it is significant that in the entire ancient near 
eastern literary record, El is never identified with a heavenly body.  Thus “the stars of El” 
points to created beings with divine status.76  The Hebrew Bible also uses My#$idoq: (“holy 
ones”) and twO)bfc; (“hosts”) for inhabitants of heaven, a term not utilized at Ugarit for 
the heavenly host.77   The “hosts” of Yahweh (twO)bFc;  hwhy) constitutes an umbrella 
term which includes the variety of  categories of  nonhuman beings who serve God.78   In 
fact, one study has specifically linked the “host” of heaven, the divine council, and the 
Hebrew Bible’s portrait of Yahweh as a warrior.79 
                                                                                                                                                 
Handy (Among the Host of Heaven:  The Syro-Palestinian Pantheon as Bureaucracy).  Handy argues that 
the  seraphim at Ugarit and in the Hebrew Bible are only messenger “gods” (a term appropriate only for a 
polytheistic context), had no independent personal volition, were clearly a sub-class (even in Jewish 
tradition), and were most likely the “security guards” of the heavenly throne room where the council met 
(151–56).  They are thus only servants of the council membership and its head, not members.  My own 
position is that the whole heavenly host constitutes the divine council (cf. I Kings 22:19) but that there was 
a strict hierarchical arrangement within the council. 
73The foundational study for demonstrating that the divine council forms the background for the 
commissioning of the prophet was that of  H. Wheeler Robinson, “The Council of Yahweh,” Journal of 
Theological Studies 45 (1944):  151–57.   See also  in this regard Christopher Seitz, “The Divine Council:  
Temporal Transition and New Prophecy in the Book of Isaiah,” Journal of Biblical Literature 109:2 
(1990):  229–47; Frank M. Cross, “The Council of Yahweh in Second Isaiah,” Journal of Near Eastern 
Studies 12  (1953):  274-277; Mullen, The Divine Council,  215ff.   
74 The fullest discussion of this topic is found in Mullen, The Divine Council, 175–208.  See also Korpel, 
A Rift in the Clouds,  269–99. 
75 KTU 1.10:I.4. 
76 Ulf Oldenburg, “Above the Stars of El:  El in Ancient South Arabic Religion,” Zeitschrift fur die 
alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 82 (1970): 187-208 (cf. 197). 
77 See Psalm 89:6-7 (Hebr.= 89:7-8); Zech 14:5; Job 5:1; 15:15 (Qere); Carol A. Newsom, “Angels,”  
Anchor Bible Dictionary, vol. I, ed. D. N. Freedman (New York:  Doubleday, 1992):  248.  For example, 
see Psalm 89:9 (Eng. = 89:8); 103:21. 
78 See Psalm 103:19-21; 148:1-5.  However, several passages unambiguously include divine beings among 
the heavenly host.  See also Isaiah 24:21 (“And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD shall 
punish the host of the high ones that are on high, [MwOrm2fb2a  MwOrm2fhA  )bfc;] and the kings of the earth upon 
the earth”) with other passages that describe divine beings  that dwell in the “heights,” such as  Isaiah 
14:12–15. 
79 Patrick D. Miller, “The Divine Council and the Prophetic Call to War,” Vetus Testamentum 18 (1968):  
101-107. 

---PAGE---
16 
 
The members of the assembly at Ugarit are unambiguously classified 
as)ilm (“gods”), bn )il  (“sons of El”), and bn )ilm  (“sons of the gods”).80  Specifically, 
in the Keret Epic, the Canaanite chief deity El sits at the head of the assembly and four 
times addresses its members as either )ilm  (“gods”) or bny  (“my sons”).81  Occurrences 
of these designations referring to heavenly beings in the Hebrew Bible are well known 
(see chart below).  Both Ugaritic and Biblical Hebrew use  ml)k  (“messenger,” typically 
translated "angel") to denote heavenly beings of a lower order than the “sons of god” or 
“divine ones.”  Just as at Ugarit and elsewhere, in the Hebrew Bible, the terms above 
(Myhi$l)v , MylI)" , or the Myhi$l)v yn"b2; ) and the Myki)Fl;mA are not to be equated.  All these 
divine beings are members of Yahweh's council, but within that council a hierarchy 
exists.82  As Handy notes, at no point are the Myki)Fl;mA ever designated as either  Myhi$l)v 
, MylI)" , or the Myhi$l)v yn"b2; in the Hebrew text.83  The practice of some English Bible 
translations to render all these terms alike as  “angels” blurs the distinctions and obscures 
the textual testimony to the divine council.  The lack of specificity inherent in the Greek 
New Testament vocabulary is also a problem with respect to discerning not only the 
levels of the divine council, but the council's presence itself.84     
 
Terminology for the Meeting Place of the Assembly85 
 
 
In Ugaritic mythology, El and his council met to govern the cosmos at the 
“sources of the two rivers,” in the “midst of the fountains of the double-deep,” and in the 
“domed tent” of El, located on the mountain of El, Mount S[apanu.86  This mountainous 
meeting place was also designated ph}r  m(d, the place of the “assembled congregation,”87 
and was associated with both physical and mythical peaks to the north of Ugarit.88  In 
like manner, Yahweh’s sanctuary is on a mountain (Mount Zion) which is located in the 
                                                 
80 In addition to the citations above containing references to the )ilm, see KTU 1.16; 1.15; 1.40:7–8, 42; cf. 
Mullen, “Divine Assembly,” 215. 
81 See Mullen, “Divine Assembly” KTU 1.16.V.1-28 for El’s leadership in the council.  On this topic in 
general, see Mullen, The Divine Council, 183ff. 
82 Handy, Among the Host of Heaven, 151–59; Mullen, The Divine Council, 210ff.; Korpel, A Rift in the 
Clouds, 289ff.   See KTU 1.2:I.11; 1.13:25.  See Gen. 28:12 as one example of many in the Hebrew Bible. 
83 Ibid., 158–59.   
84 Part of the problem is that the Greek New Testament does not make a vocabulary distinction, having 
only  a1ggeloj (which can have a heavenly denizen in mind or a mere human messenger).  This problem 
is similar to that of the New Testament’s limited vocabulary for alcoholic beverages.  Whereas the Old 
Testament has nearly a half dozen words for such beverages, the New Testament uses oi1noj. 
85 The fullest treatments of  this item occurs in Mullen, The Divine Council, 128–74, and Richard J. 
Clifford, The Cosmic Mountain in Canaan and the Old Testament, Harvard Semitic Monographs IV 
(Cambridge:  Harvard University Press, 1972), 34-176. 
86 Frank M. Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic (Cambridge:  Harvard University Press, 1973), 36; 
Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds, 370; Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 98-160.  See KTU 1.4; 1.2:III; 1.3:V.5–7; 
1.6:I 32–34; 1.101:2; 1.3:III.29 
87 Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds, 269. 
88 Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 34-160. 

---PAGE---
17 
“heights of the north,” the NwOpcf yt'k2;r:yA (Psalm 48:1-2).89   The “height of Zion” is a 
“well-watered garden” (Jer. 31:12; Isa. 33:20-22), and in Ezekiel 28:13-16, the terms 
“mountain of God” and “garden of God” (not to mention Eden) are paralleled.  The 
mountain of Yahweh is also called the d('wOm rha (“mount of assembly”), again located in 
NwOpcf yt'k2;r:yA (the “heights of the north/S[aphon”; Isa. 14:13).  The “domed tent,” of 
course, evokes the imagery of the Tent of Meeting and the Tabernacle.90  
 
Summation 
 
 
The terms above are not exhaustive, but are representative of the range of specific 
linguistic congruence between Ugarit religious literature and the Hebrew Bible relevant 
to the concept of the divine council.  The data is summarized in transliteration below: 91 
 
                                                 
89 Additionally, Shadday may mean “mountain dweller.”  See Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds, 581; Cross, 
Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic, 48–60. 
90 Richard J. Clifford, “The Tent of El and the Israelite Tent of Meeting,” Catholic Biblical Quarterly  33 
(1971):  221–27. 
91 Vocalization is, of course, supplied according to each language’s conventional scheme.  The verses  
supplied are not exhaustive, but only representative. 

---PAGE---
18 
 
Ugaritic  
 
Hebrew Bible 
 
Ugaritic alone 
 
 
 
ph}r )ilm 
"assembly of the gods"92 
 
 
dr bn )il  
“generation of the sons of 
El” 
 
 
Ugaritic & Hebrew 
Bible 
 
 
 
)ilm 
“gods”  
)elo4h|<m  or )e4l|<m 
“gods” or “divine beings” or 
“godlike beings”; For example, 
see Job 41:25 (Heb. = 41:17); 
Psalm 58:5 (emended);  8:5 (Heb. 
= 8:6);  86:8; 97:7, 9;  Exod. 
15:11; Dan. 11:36 
bn )il  
“sons of the gods” 
bene<  )e4l|<m  or  
bene<  )elo4h|<m  or 
bene<   ha4)elo4h|<m 
Psalm 29:1; 89:6 (Heb. = 89:7); 
Gen. 6:2,4; Job 1:6; 2:1 
bn )il  
(dt bn )ilm 
“sons of El” 
“assembly of the sons of 
El”93 
See above with refer
ence to bene<  )e4l|<m 
(in case  mem is enclitic) 
 
(dt )ilm 
(dt )il 
“assembly of the gods” 
“assembly of El”94 
(adat )e4l  
“assembly of God” - Ps. 82:1 
s\d 
“assembly” 
so,d yhwh 
so,d )elo,ah 
“assembly of Yahweh” – Jer. 
23:18; “assembly of God” – Job 
15:8 
ph}r kkbm  
“congregation of the stars” 
ko,k;ebe<  bo4qer 
ko,k;ebe<  )e4l 
“morning stars” (Job 38:7); “stars 
of God” (Isa. 14:13) 
ph}r  m(d 
"congregation of the 
assembly"; “assembled 
congregation”95 
har  mo,(e4d 
“mount of assembly” (Isa. 14:13) 
(mount) S[pn 
“Zaphon”; a mountain to 
the north96 
yarkete, s[apho,n 
“heights of the north” (Psa. 48:1-
2) 
Hebrew Bible alone 
 
 
 
 
 
qedo4s\|<m   or  
qo4des\  in a collective 
sense 
“holy ones” ; Psalm 89:6-7 
(Heb.= 89:7-8); Zech 14:5; Job 
5:1; Job 15:15 (Qere)97 
 
 
s[eba4)o,t 
“hosts”  Isa. 13:4; 24:21 e.g. 
 
 
                                                 
92 The mem on the end of  )il|4ma may be enclitic, requiring a singular translation (“assembly of El”).   
Plural forms in reference to the council members occur in KTU 1.2.I. 18,20,22,23,24,26,27,29, and 34. 
93 Cf. KTU 1.4.III.14. 
94 Cf.  KTU 1.15:II.7,11 
95 Cf. KTU 1.2.I. 
96 For a lengthy discussion of this terminology and its correspondences in biblical literature, see Clifford, 
The Cosmic Mountain, 34-176; idem., “Tent of El.” 
97 Reading Zech. 14:5 with the LXX; see also Psa. 77:14; 93:5; Dan. 4:10,14,20.   

---PAGE---
19 
Objections to the Reality of a Divine Council in the Old Testament 
 
Some interpreters argue against the idea that the Myhi$l)v of Psalm 82:1b and 6a 
are divine beings by introducing the following texts: 
 
Exodus 4:16   And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be, 
even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of 
God (Myhi$l)V ).  
Exodus 7:1  And the LORD said unto Moses, See, I have made thee a god 
(Myhi$l)V ) to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet. 
 
Since Moses is referred to as Myhi$l)V , so the argument goes, the Myhi$l)V of 
Psalm 82:1b and 6a should also be taken as referring to human beings.  This amounts to 
“apples and oranges” reasoning, and misses the point of the terminology in the pertinent 
verses.  While it is true that Moses can be an Myhi$l)V , how is it that we should use this 
fact wherever Myhi$l)V occurs and does not refer to Yahweh?  Put another way, this 
argument says that since Myhi$l)V refers to a human being in these instances, it must in 
Psalm 82 – But why?   As we have seen, the structural elements and parallelism of that 
Psalm argue against this conclusion, as does the logic of verse 6, as well as other 
passages that refer to  plural Myhi$l)V.98  Denying the obvious in Psalm 82 accomplishes 
nothing toward ridding the Hebrew Bible of the existence of  plural Myhi$l)v .   
The reason Moses is called Myhi$l)V in Exodus 4:16 and 7:1 is that he is 
functioning in the manner of a member of God's council.  Moses is not a mere messenger 
(he is not referred to as a  K7)al;mA here).  Unlike prophets such as Jeremiah and Isaiah, 
who receive a singular commissioning in the presence of Yahweh's council, Moses 
regularly spoke to Yahweh “face to face.”  Moreover, his task went well beyond 
dispensing revelation; he was a governing mediator, effectively ruling Israel at God’s 
behest.  It is this governing at God’s discretion which marks him as an Myhi$l)V , much in 
the same way that Israel’s king would be referred to as a “son of Myhi$l)V ,”99 terminology 
which needs no further comment.  Whether it be before Pharaoh or his own people, 
Moses as Myhi$l)V refers to the display of true divine authority, with all its bestowed 
dominion and protection. 
                                                 
98 For example, Psalm 89:6-8 (“6 For who in the skies above can compare with the LORD? Who is like 
the LORD among the heavenly beings (Myli)' yn'b2;)?  7 In the council of the holy ones (My#$i$dq; dwOsb2;") 
God is greatly feared; he is more awesome than all who surround him. 8 O LORD God Almighty, who is 
like you? You are mighty, O LORD, and your faithfulness surrounds you”); Psalm 29:1-2 (“1 Ascribe to 
the LORD, O mighty ones (Myli)'), ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.  2 Ascribe to the LORD the 
glory due his name; worship the LORD in the splendor of his holiness”); and Isaiah 24:21, which clearly 
distinguishes human rulers from the council Myhi$l)v  (“In that day the LORD will punish the powers in the 
heavens above and the kings on the earth below”).  The point with the latter is, what powers are there in 
heaven besides Yahweh?  The Myhi$l)v  and the council are the only logical conclusion. 
99 Psalm 2:7 and Psalm 110:3 (assuming that the LXX – cf. Psalm 109 – is the original reading). 

---PAGE---
20 
Another common objection involves John 10:34-36, where Jesus quotes Psalm 
82:100 
34 Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods?  35 If 
he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture cannot 
be broken; 36 Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the 
world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?  
 
The point of this objection is that Jesus, by this quotation, is saying in effect that 
“since Psalm 82 has men being called Myhi$l)v , then I can call myself the Son of God and 
claim equality with God.”  The presumed reference in verse 35 to the Myhi$l)v  being the 
recipients of the law (which would require they be human) supposedly confirms this 
exegesis.  Unfortunately, this is a textbook example where New Testament scholars, 
lacking any knowledge of Ugaritic or other comparative semitic data, interpret the 
Hebrew text via the appeal to Jewish tradition,101 or appeal to the previous generation of 
New Testament scholars who wrote before the discovery of the Ugaritic materials.  
Several points need to be made regarding Jesus’ use of Psalm 82, for His hermeneutic 
amounts to a powerful testimony to His own deity. 
First, the presumed (traditional) argument actually does nothing to advance Jesus’ 
claim for deity, laid down earlier in verse 30 (“I and my Father are one”), for it amounts 
to Jesus claiming “I can call myself the son of God just like other men had the title 
Myhi$l)v .”  The point here is that the alleged humans in Psalm 82:1b and 6a were still 
men, despite their designation as Myhi$l)v .  One wonders where the power is in such an 
equation.  Was Jesus merely arguing for a non-ontological title?  This is hardly what He 
was asserting.  This is no more an argument for the deity of Jesus than one could make 
for the deity of Moses from Exodus 4:16 and 7:1, where he is called an Myhi$l)v .  Second, 
it is important to observe that nowhere in the passage is the law actually mentioned.  It is 
an assumption – and a flawed one at that – that the “word of God” in verse 35 is a 
reference to the reception of the Mosaic law.  In fact, there is no reference to the law in 
all of Psalm 82.   In reality the “word of God” that came to the Myhi$l)v  in question refers 
to the judgment rendered against them by the speaker (Yahweh) of  Psalm 82:7:  “But ye 
                                                 
100 The MT and LXX agree in the verse quoted, and the quotation is exact. 
101 By “Jewish tradition” I mean the rabbinic opinion (again to “protect” God) that )eloh|4m  here refers to 
men.  By way of examples of New Testament scholarship’s undiscriminating acceptance of this notion, see 
Jerome H. Neyrey, “ ‘I Said:  You are Gods’:  Psalm 82:6 and John 10,” Journal of Biblical Literature 
108:4 (1989):  647-663 (esp. 653ff, where the author cites a variety of midrashic interpretations, and in 
turn considers John 10:34-36 as a midrash); W. Gary Phillips, “An Apologetic Study of John 10:34-36,” 
Bibliotheca Sacra 146 (Oct-Dec 1989): 405-419 ( Phillips fails to interact with scholarly literature on 
Psalm 82 or the divine council); and James S. Ackerman, “The Rabbinic Interpretation of Psalm 82 and the 
Gospel of John,” Harvard Theological Review 59 (1966):  186-191.  Ackerman points out that the notion 
that the “gods” of Psalm 82 refer to human judges stems exclusively from rabbinic concerns for orthodoxy.  
Ackerman rejects the typical interpretation of human judges in favor of another midrashic interpretation – 
that “gods” refers to the Israelites who received the law.  Other than the fact that the law is nowhere in 
view in Psalm 82, and that the New Testament  tradition that the law was given via angelic beings creates a 
text-critical conundrum (see footnote 107 and this author’s paper which provides a solution to this), 
Ackerman’s thesis is based on the assumption that the rabbis who offer this solution took Psalm 82 out of 
context to do it – and that Jesus did the same (see p. 188). 

---PAGE---
21 
shall die like Adam, and fall like one of the Shining Ones.”102  Even if this text did 
somehow refer to the giving of the law, it would point once again to the Myhi$l)v  in 
Psalm 82:6 being divine beings, for there is a definite connection in the Old Testament 
between the giving of the law and Yahweh’s divine council: 
 
Deuteronomy 33:2 (NIV) - He said, The Lord came from Sinai, and dawned 
over them from Seir; he shone forth from mount Paran.  He came with myriads 
of holy ones from the south, from his mountain slopes.103 
 
By his use of Psalm 82:6, Jesus was not arguing that he deserved a title shared by 
other mere mortals.  He was reminding his Jewish adversaries of the existence of the 
other divine beings – the Myhi$l)v  - in Yahweh’s divine council.  Their own Scripture 
affirmed the notion that Yahweh was not the only Myhi$l)v .  To be sure, He was superior, 
but the point being made was that it was fallacious on their part to assume that Yahweh 
did not have divine “offspring”.  Moreover, by virtue of the context of this quotation, 
coming as it did on the heels of Jesus’ claim to be equal with the Father, Jesus was in 
effect saying, “My Father has many divine sons – Psalm 82:6 testifies to this.  Yet I am 
unique with respect to the sons of God.  I am in fact above them, and am qualitatively 
different from them as the monogenh/j son of God."  Arguing that Psalm 82:6 refers to 
human judges robs Jesus of a very pointed claim to deity.  
The final objection to the reality of the divine council and its Myhi$l)v  are 
passages like those in Isaiah that denounce idols and forcefully contend there are no other 
gods besides Yahweh.104  In fact, such claims are also present in Deuteronomy 32 itself 
(verses 15-18, 21).  Since the Scriptures do not contradict themselves, the presence of 
such passages, particularly when juxtaposed with references to divine beings in 
Deuteronomy 32:8-9 and 43, do not mitigate against the existence of the Myhi$l)v , but 
actually assumes their reality to make the point of the comparison.  Nevertheless, how are 
these statements to be reconciled with the reality of the divine council?    
It could simply be argued that what these passages assert is that there is no other 
Deity  than Yahweh.  He is the only true God; all the other Myhi$l)v  have contingent 
existence and power, were created, and are not omnipotent nor omniscient.  One could 
also argue that what is being proffered in such texts is not the notion that the other “gods” 
don’t exist, but merely that they are powerless to act.  By definition this requires 
distinction.  Without proof that the prophets recognized the reality of the divine council 
and had this distinction in mind, though, this answer would lack force. We have already 
                                                 
102 See footnote 47 for this translation. 
103 The above text is that which many scholars presume to be the source of the New Testament notion that 
the law was delivered by angels (Acts 7:38,53; Gal. 3:19; Heb. 2:2).  Unfortunately, there is no direct 
reference to the law here either, and the LXX version of the verse, while containing reference to the law, 
lacks mention of angelic beings!  The problem with finding the Old Testament antecedent for this idea is 
complex, involving morphological, grammatical, and textual difficulties.  This author knows of no 
evangelical text-critical solution in print, but has attempted one (Michael S. Heiser, “Mount Sinai Which is 
in Arabia,” unpublished paper read at the Annual Meeting of the Evangelical Theological Society, 
Orlando, FL, November 21, 1998). 
104 Cf. Isaiah 40:18–20; 41:5–7; 44:9–20; 46:5–7. 

---PAGE---
22 
noted the presence of the divine council in Jeremiah (23:18, 22).   Fortunately, the book 
of Isaiah also has several passages that point to the divine council, one of which (like 
Deuteronomy 32) is actually located within a passage denouncing idols.  We have 
already noted Isaiah 6 and 24:21, the latter of which makes clear the fact that there are 
powers in heaven besides Yahweh - but there are other texts as well. 
For example, in Isaiah 40:12-26 the prophet mocks the idols and their feebleness 
in comparison to Yahweh, but then greets his readers with the following (emphasis 
mine): 
 
25 "To whom will you compare me? Or who is my equal?" says the Holy One. 
26 Lift your eyes and look to the heavens: Who created all these? He who 
brings out the starry host one by one, and calls them each by name. Because 
of his great power and mighty strength, not one of them is missing. 
 
 
The starry host which are named by Yahweh calls to remembrance the "stars of 
God" of Isaiah 14:13 and Deuteronomy 4:19 (see discussion below).  Additionally, the 
phrases, "To whom will you compare me? Or who is my equal?" draw one's attention to 
the common, "Who is like Yahweh?" phraseology, so often used to compare the God of 
Israel directly to the divine beings of the pagan pantheons.105  It is indeed striking that, 
just after asking what heavenly being compares to Him, Yahweh answers His own 
question that He is the Creator of the other Myhi$l)v , and they are therefore subject to him 
and “line up at his command” – not one of them dare miss His roll call!  It would be 
nonsensical to have Yahweh claim to have created and to command entities that do not in 
fact exist.  The juxtaposition of passages like this one and the proclamation that there is 
only one true God demonstrates that the reality of a divine council of plural  Myhi$l)v  is in  
no way incompatible with monotheism, provided that it is articulated in ancient semitic 
terms. 
 
By way of other instances of the divine council in Isaiah, there are a several 
passages where Yahweh issues commands in the plural imperative form to an unseen 
audience – an audience which is none other than His council.106  One familiar example is 
Isaiah 40:1-2: 
 
1 Comfort, comfort (w@mxJnA w@mxJnA ) my people, says your God. 
2 Speak (w@rb2;dA) tenderly to Jerusalem and cry (w2)r:qi) to her 
 
Some have sought to interpret the above plural imperatives in ways that make “my 
people” a vocative, but this can be ruled out by several grammatical considerations.107  
“My people” is instead the object of these imperatives.  This conclusion is valid for more 
than strictly grammatical reasons, however.  Yahweh issuing commands in the plural 
                                                 
105 Cf. Exod. 15:11; Deut. 33:26; I Kings 8:23; Psalm 89:7–8; 113:5, for example. 
106 Frank M. Cross, “The Council of Yahweh in Second Isaiah,”  274-277; Christopher R. Seitz, “The 
Divine Council:  Temporal Transition and New Prophecy in the Book of Isaiah,”  Journal of Biblical 
Literature 109:2  (1990):  229-247. 
107 Seitz, pp. 229-230.  See also John D. W. Watts, Isaiah 34-66, Word Biblical Commentary, vol. 25 
(Waco:  Word Books, 1987), textual note 1.a, 77. 

---PAGE---
23 
imperative is in fact a prevalent component of the divine council genre in the Hebrew 
Bible.108 
 
The Divine Council as an Old Testament Theological Concept and Deuteronomy 32:8 
  
Old Testament passages and comparative linguistic data show that the Hebrew 
Bible contains a concept of a divine assembly which is undeniably analogous to that at 
Ugarit (not to mention other ancient near eastern civilizations).  Consequently, there is no 
theological need to opt for the MT "sons of Israel" reading over the "sons of God" 
reading attested in the LXX and 4QDeutq and 4QDeutj .  In fact, the "sons of God" 
reading makes much better sense in light of the biblical history and the Old Testament 
theology, especially that of Deuteronomy.  The same cannot be said for the MT reading.  
A brief overview of how well both readings "fit" into the scope of Old Testament 
theology will serve to illustrate this. 
 
The Nations Given Up to the Fallen Divine Beings 
 
As noted at the beginning of our discussion, accepting the MT in Deuteronomy 
32:8 ("he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel") 
along with the correlation of that verse with Genesis 10-11 results in logical problems.  
As Tigay notes: 
 
   This reading raises a number of difficulties.  Why would God base the 
number of nations on the number of Israelites?  . . .  Why would He have 
based the division on their number at the time they went to Egypt, an event 
not mentioned in the poem?  In addition, verse 9, which states that God’s 
portion was Israel, implies a contrast:  Israel was God’s share while the other 
peoples were somebody else’s share, but verse 8 fails to note whose share 
they were.109 
 
 
In other words, it makes little sense for God to have based the number of 
geographical regions on the earth shortly after He dispersed the nations at Babel on the 
family size of Israel, especially since there was no Jewish race at the time.  This problem 
is compounded (and so also the difficulty with accepting MT) when one considers 
Deuteronomy 32:9 in light of the MT reading.  What logical correlation is the writer 
making when he says in verse 8 that God "set the bounds of the people according to the 
number of the children of Israel" and then makes the concluding observation in verse 9 
that "for the LORD's portion is his people, Jacob his allotted inheritance"?  Certainly the 
wording suggests a contrast  between verses 8 and 9 - but what is contrastive about 
saying God divided the earth into seventy units since there were seventy sons of Israel 
and then adding that Israel was His own?  Once the MT is abandoned, however, the piont 
of the contrast becomes dramatically clear. 
The statement in Deuteronomy 32:9 that "the LORD's portion is his people, Jacob 
his allotted inheritance” (NIV) provides the key for understanding the contrast being set 
                                                 
108 Ibid., 232ff.   See also Mullen, The Divine Council, 216–26. 
109 Ibid., 302. 

---PAGE---
24 
up between verse 8 and 9. Since verse nine clearly presents the nation Jacob/Israel 
asbeing taken  (qlx) as an allotted inheritance (hlxn - note the wordplay on both 
counts with the Hiphil verb in verse 8) by the sovereign divine personage (Yahweh), the 
parallelism of MT’s verse 9 would require the “nations” of verse 8 be given as an 
inheritance as well.110 Hence the point of Deuteronomy 32:8-9 is not  merely that God 
created seventy territorial units after Babel, but that each of these units was given  as an 
inheritance.  The question is, to whom were the nations given?  This is left unstated in 
Deut. 32:8a, but 32:8b, the focus of our controversy, provides the answer.  The parallel 
only makes sense if the original reading of 8b included a reference to other divine beings 
to whom the other nations could be given:  the “sons of God.”  The point of the Deut. 
32:8-9 is that, sometime after God separated the people of the earth at Babel, and 
established where on the earth they were to be located, he assigned each of the 70 nations 
to the fallen sons of God (who were also 70 in number).111  After observing humanity's 
rebellion prior to the flood, and then again in the Babel incident, God decided to desist in 
His efforts to work directly with humanity.  In an action reminiscent of Romans 1, God 
"gave humanity up" to their persistent resistance to obeying Him.  God's new approach 
would be to create ex nihilo  a unique nation to Himself (Israel), which nation He 
originates in the very next chapter of Genesis with the call of Abraham.  Hence each 
pagan nation was overseen by a divine being of inferior status to Yahweh, but Israel 
would be tended to by the “God of gods” and “Lord of lords” (Deut. 10:17).   
According to Deuteronomy 4:19, this "giving up" of the nations was a punitive 
act.  Rather than electing them to a special relationship to Himself, God gave these 
nations up to the idolatry (of which babel was symptomatic) in which they willfully 
persisted.  Consider the two passages in relation to one another: 
 
Deut. 4:19 (RSV) - And beware lest you lift up your eyes to heaven, and when 
you see the sun and the moon and the stars, all the host of heaven, you be 
drawn away and worship them and serve them, things which the LORD your 
God has allotted to all the peoples under the whole heaven.112 
 
Deut. 32:8-9 (with LXX and DSS) – (8) When the Most High gave the nations 
their inheritance, when he divided all mankind, he set up boundaries for the 
                                                 
110lxnhb in Deut. 32:8 is pointed as a Hiphil infinitive absolute, but should probably be understood as a 
defective spelling of the infinitive construct: lxin:hAb; (Sanders, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 154).  
This is a minor consideration, for the real point is the relationship of the object of this Hiphil verbal form, 
the nations.  As Paul Sanders notes (154), the Hiphil of the verb lxn can be “connected both with an 
accusativus personae  (the inheriting person) or with an accusativus rei  (the object inherited by this 
person). Those who embrace the MT reading for the verse would opt for the former, which would imply 
that the nations of the earth inherited a certain amount of property at God’s hand, namely their own lands.  
Hence the NIV’s translation, “When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance.”  Those who agree 
with this author would see the latter syntactical choice as more sensible:  that the nations themselves were 
given  as an inheritance (rendered, “when the Most High gave the nations as an inheritance”).  For 
examples of the latter choice found elsehwere, see Deut. 1:38; 3:28; 21:16; 31:7; Josh. 1:6; I Sam. 2:8; 
Zech. 8:12; and Prov. 8:21 for other examples. 
111 Recall again that at Ugarit there were seventy sons of El (KTU 1.4:VI.46).  I refer to the sons of God as 
"fallen" here in light of Genesis 6 as well as Deut. 4:19. 
112 Noted the same verb in Deut. 4:19 as in 32:8, “allotted” (qlx). 

---PAGE---
25 
peoples according to the number of the sons of God. (9) For the LORD's 
portion is his people, Jacob his allotted inheritance.  
 
As Jeffrey Tigay notes in reference to these passages: 
 
[These passages] seem to reflect a biblical view that . . . as punishment for man’s 
repeated spurning of His authority in primordial times (Gen. 3-11), God deprived 
mankind at large of true knowledge of Himself and ordained that it should worship 
idols and subordinate celestial beings . . . He selected Abraham and his descendants 
as the objects of His personal attention to create a model nation.113 
 
 
The  Divine Council and Israelite  Monotheism 
 
If other divine beings do not actually exist, texts like these below are completely 
eviscerated of meaning:  
 
Psalm 89:6,7 - "For who in the skies above can compare with the LORD? Who 
is like the LORD among the sons of the gods (Myl) ynb)?  In the council of 
the holy ones (My#dq-dwsb) God is greatly feared; he is more awesome than 
all who surround him." 
 
Psalm 29:1 - “A psalm of David.  Ascribe to the LORD, O sons of the gods  
(Myl) ynb), ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.” 
 
How hollow it would be to have the psalmist extolling the greatness of God by 
comparing Him to beings which do not exist, and to in turn ask these fabricated divinities 
ascribe glory and strength to the Lord!   
The Scripture writers did in fact assume the existence of these divine beings.  But 
how can it be maintained that the Hebrew Bible espouses monotheism when its authors 
continued to use the terms Myhi$l)V and  Myli)"   and “the sons of” Myhi$l)V and  Myli)"  in 
reference to non-human figures?  The solution to this apparent impasse is relatively 
simple, but requires an adjustment in both the way we define “GOD” and how we 
understand the data of the Hebrew Bible.  Making such adaptations will clarify just how 
unique Israel’s religion was in its ancient near eastern context. 
First, hesitation to embrace the details of the divine council stems from habitually 
viewing the Old Testament through western eyes.  We as western Christians  have been 
so conditioned by our own conception of  the word “GOD” - a being that is omnipotent, 
self-existent, omniscient, omnipresent, and possessing ultimate creative power - that we 
                                                 
113 Jeffrey Tigay, JPS Torah Commentary:  Deuteronomy (Philadelphia:  The Jewish Publication Society, 
1996):  435.  The same idea contained in these verses also seems the point of Zephaniah 3:9 - "For then 
will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the LORD, to serve him 
with one consent."  David was certainly familiar with this idea, as his incensed tone in I Sam. 26:19 
indicates:  "Now let my lord the king listen to his servant's words. If the LORD has incited you against me, 
then may he accept an offering. If, however, men have done it, may they be cursed before the LORD! They 
have now driven me from my share in the LORD's inheritance and have said, 'Go, serve other gods'." 

---PAGE---
26 
assume the unreality of any entity referred to by the same word.  Would the ancient 
semitic mind have defined "GOD" as we do, and then made the same assumption?  We 
have already seen that even Isaiah, famous for his diatribes against pagan worship, uses 
language and imagery analogous to depictions of the divine council in other places of the 
Hebrew Bible and outside the Hebrew Bible.   Isaiah simultaneously affirmed the 
existence of other divine beings and the one true deity of Israel.  We must do the same. 
Unfortunately, we have labeled the ancient near eastern religious systems 
“polytheistic," and have defined that term in such a way as to assert that the ancient 
Semites believed that  all non-human entities bearing the label Myhi$l)V  must have been 
omnipotent, self-existent, omniscient, omnipresent, and possessing ultimate creative 
power.  Hence it is we who have concocted the notion that the ancients could not have 
understood the various Myhi$l)v  as existing in a hierarchy where the attributes of the 
Myhi$l)v  differed – and where the attributes we think of as defining deity were held by 
only one of the Myhi$l)v .  To be sure, it was due to the gracious revelation of God to 
Israel through Moses that enabled them to sort this out – and we know they did sort it out 
precisely because of the internal and external evidence alluded to above.   
The authors of the Hebrew Bible simultaneously affirm the existence of  plural 
Myhi$l)v  while asking in a number of places, “Who among the gods is like you, O 
LORD?,” precisely because they already knew  that Yahweh was an Myhi$l)v , but only 
one Myhi$l)v  was omnipotent, pre-existent, and omniscient.114  Put another way, Israelite 
religion providentially extended beyond  the lexeme  Myhi$l)v  by virtue of Israel’s actual 
historical contact with Yahweh.  It was no conundrum for the people of Israel to affirm 
that the word Myhi$l)v in their language described actual beings that Yahweh had created 
who were members of His council, while knowing that none of these Myhi$l)v  were truly 
comparable to Yahweh.  In fact, the Hebrew Bible could not deny the existence of  other  
Myhi$l)v  since Yahweh had created them!  Their understanding of what defined deity (as 
opposed to divinity - "god-likeness") was derived from their experience of Yahweh’s 
power over all the other nations.  Whereas other ancient near eastern religions showed 
only glimpses of the monotheistic idea, 115 Israel alone achieved consistency in the 
concept. To subsequently use our conception of God, which derives from reading the 
record of the exploits of Yahweh, against the ancient understanding of multiple  Myhi$l)v  
to allegedly avoid a conclusion that would not have even entered the minds of the 
Israelites is illegitimate.  There is no need to create wholly interpretive, camouflaged 
                                                 
114 Exodus 15:11.  See also Ps. 86:8; 138:1 
115 As discussions of the pantheons and the phenomenon of the divine council demonstrate, all ancient 
near eastern religions religions divided their gods into “non-council” and “council” groups, the latter 
forming the “upper tier” of those beings who inhabited the heavenly realms.  The fact that there exists 
evidence in Mesopotamia for monotheistic ideology, and that at least one Egyptian “theology” presents one 
god as supreme creator of all the others testifies to the facts that we must not superimpose the exclusivity 
of the attributes of Yahweh to other Myhi$l)v , nor should we assume the ancients were incapable of the 
same distinction.  With respect to Mesopotamia in this regard, see J. Hehn, Die Biblische und die 
babylonische Gottesidee (1913) and B. Baentsch, Altorientalischer und israelitischer Monotheismus 
(1906).  For Egypt, I have in mind the Memphite theology. 

---PAGE---
27 
translations,116 or to interpret Myhi$l)v  as human “judges,” an approach that requires 
either paying lip service to an Old Testament hermeneutic that incorporates comparative 
philology or jettisons the analogous material altogether.  
Second, it is hardly necessary to balk at affirming the reality of the divine council 
since the Hebrew Bible’s presentation of the concept may be genuinely distinguished 
from the pagan understanding.  Aside from uncontradicted assertions that none of the 
Myhi$l)v  were comparable to Yahweh, the description of the divine council in the Hebrew 
Bible departs from that of other ancient near eastern religions in several important ways. 
For example, Yahweh is transparently depicted as the sole Deity credited with 
bringing all that exists into being.  He was unassisted in His creative acts.117  None of the 
other divine beings rendered Him aid in this endeavour.  The Hebrew Bible strips the 
Myhi$l)v of this deed, reserving credit for the creation for only Yahweh.   An equally 
radical departure from the ancient pagan mind is the absence of any  hint of theogony in 
the Old Testament.  Yahweh produced the Myhi$l)v  and everything else without a consort.  
Yahweh’s “fatherhood” of the Myhi$l)v can only be spoken of  in formal terms.  Lastly, 
the members of the council, contrary to ancient near eastern religions, cannot be viewed 
as  genuine rivals to the Most High. Yahweh need not battle the divine beings to maintain 
His position as leader of the council and hence the cosmos.  There are no mighty deeds 
ascribed to any other than Yahweh.  The Myhi$l)v are obviously inferior.  Yahweh is 
unchallenged and, in fact, unchallengeable.   
 
Conclusion 
 
 
The chief purpose of this article was to respond to the concern that accepting the 
LXX and Qumran evidence for the "sons of God" reading in Deuteronomy 32:8 requires 
seeing Israelite religion as polytheistic.  In an effort to demonstrate that this conclusion is 
unfounded, two assertions were offered and defended:  (1)  the textual evidence favors 
the "sons of God" reading, particularly when common misunderstandings of text-critical 
history and methodology utilized to favor MT are corrected; and (2)  the concept of the 
divine council, common to ancient semitic religion, is contained in the Hebrew Bible and 
constitutes the theological backdrop for Deuteronomy 32:8-9.  In light of the evidence, 
there exists no textual or theological justification for preferring the MT reading.  
Deuteronomy 32:8 should read "sons of God," not "sons of Israel." 
 
                                                 
116 For example, see the NIV at Psalm 29:1 – “A psalm of David.  Ascribe to the LORD, O mighty ones 
(Hebrew = Myli)' yn'b;), ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.” 
117 As the plural cohortatives and pronouns  (“let us make man in our image”) in Genesis 1:26-27 indicate, 
the creation of mankind is a decision of the council.  It should be noted, however, that the following verb 
(“so God created . . .”) is singular, thereby informing us that only Yahweh/El did the creating – He merely 
announced His decision to the council and carried it out.  

---PAGE---
